<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="altacal">
<head>
<title>Alta Cal Reviews Tom Sawyer</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1877 American Western Favorable </keyword>-->
<h2>San Francisco <i>Daily Alta California</i> [unsigned]<br>
1877: January 15</h2>

<p>Tom Sawyer was a boy, not one of the sort that you read about in
good books, but a little devil, never malicious and always at some
trick, and in the course of years he engaged in a multitude, all of
which are here recorded in Twain's style. He had special aversions
for church, Sunday school, pious people, devout conversation and
the company of his sedate but good old aunt. In spite of his
efforts to escape from such inflictions he had to suffer them once
in a while, but in his efforts to get some diversion on such
occasions he more than once made lively sensations. Too lazy to get
his Sunday school lessons, he managed by sharp trading to buy up a
lot of the tickets given to the best pupils, and when a
distinguished visitor came the children were requested to step
forward with their tickets so that the one who had the most should
receive the prize. To the astonishment of all Tom Sawyer was the
hero, and, after a great time had been made over him, the visitor
thought Tom should have a chance to show his learning, so he asked
him who were the first two of the twelve Apostles to follow Jesus,
it being presumed that the prize boy knew such things perfectly,
for the lesson of the term had been in the study of the four
Gospels. Tom felt the necessity of giving some answer, and his was
"David and Goliath," to the surprise of the visitor, the
consternation of the head teacher and the amusement of the school.
When Tom went to church he took a large snapping bug (which has a
grip like a crab) with him, and it got hold of a church-going dog,
which rushed around the building and howled in a manner highly
unbecoming to the place. When he was sick his aunt gave him
pain-killer, and when she went out he gave a dose to the cat, which
squawled, rushed around like mad, upsetting everything, and then
jumped through the window, breaking a pane of glass in the way.
Aunt Polly hearing the disturbance and finding the cause, scolded
Tom for being so cruel to the cat, but Tom said she had compelled
him to take pain-killer when he protested, and he had not given it
to pussy till she came and begged for a taste when she saw him pour
it into a spoon. He went to school, and got into trouble on account
of a little girl--both about ten years old. Having read about the
romantic life of pirates, Tom and two companions of the same age
stole a little raft, on which they floated a few miles on the
Mississippi to a small uninhabited island, where they remained
three days, while their relatives mourned their supposed death by
drowning, and when they were discovered and brought back there was
great rejoicing, and Tom was looked at by other little boys as a
wonderful hero, and he put on awful airs on account of the
sensation he made. What we have told here is merely part of the
outline of the story; the chief merit is in the filling in, which
is full of humorous and acute delineation of the follies,
superstitions and peculiarities of boys, girls and older
people.</p>

<a href="hompgrev.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="xiansect.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="athenae">
<head>
<title>Athenaeum Reviews Innocents</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1870 British Unfavorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Athenaeum</i> [British; unsigned]<br>
1870: September 24</h2>
</center>

<p>But for <a href="hingston.html">the Introduction to this
book</a>, we should have little difficulty in assigning it its
proper place in literature. We should say at once that the author
was draping himself in the garb of one of those typical Yankee
tourists of whom we hear so often, and whom we do meet
occasionally, -- the tourists who "do" Europe in six weeks, --
whose comment on Venice is that they do not care much for those old
towns, and on the Venus de' Medici that they do not like them stone
gals. If we thought at all about the name on the title-page, we
should put it down as a pseudonym, though the probability is that
we should not think about it. Anyhow, we should come to the
conclusion that Mark Twain, whoever he might be, had hit off the
oddities of some of his countrymen very well; that many of his
remarks were amusing, and almost witty; and that he was certainly
not such a fool as he tried to look. But when Mr. Hingston tells us
seriously that Mark Twain is really the pseudonym of the sub-editor
of a daily paper in a Western city a few months old, that he is a
flower of the wilderness, a thoroughly untravelled American
applying the standard of Nevada to historical Europe, we are fairly
puzzled. We can readily believe that the writer of this book is
ignorant of many of those things which would be familiar to an
English tourist. His remark that "Raphael, Angelo, Canova -- giants
like these gave birth to the designs" of the statues on the
Cathedral at Milan, is not much more than the hasty generalization
of one who takes his facts from guides and guide-books. The
statement that "Raphael pictured such infernal villains as
Catherine de' Medici seated in heaven and conversing familiarly
with the Virgin Mary and the angels," may surprise those who
remember that Catherine de' Medici was only born one year before
the death of Raphael. Again, we are told that Raphael is buried in
Santa Croce, instead of in the Pantheon; but we may conclude from
this that in Mark Twain's opinion every great artist should be
buried in several places, just as each relic of a saint is
multiplied. We owe this suggestion to what Mark Twain says of an
important fellow-passenger calling himself Commissioner of the
United States of America to Europe, Asia, and Africa. The comment
on this "titular avalanche" is, "to my thinking, when the United
States considered it necessary to send a dignitary of that tonnage
across the ocean, it would be in better taste and safer to take him
apart and cart him over in sections in several ships."</p>

<p>In all these mistakes there is nothing unnatural. Most men who
are not learned, and who do not take the precaution of using books
of reference before they speak, may fall into the same errors. The
only thing that characterizes Mark Twain is the reckless manner in
which he makes his assertions. The greater his blunder, the more
assurance there is in his language. Thus he says, without the
slightest reserve, that the Emperor of the French "kept his
faithful watch and walked his weary beat as a common policeman of
London" as if the special constable of 1848 had been Z 264. Yet it
is not till we get beyond the mistakes that we light on the genuine
untravelled American. It is significant of him that he does not
commit himself to facts of his own, because he is sceptical as to
the existence of everything. He listens gravely to the guide's
stories, and then asks some question which reduces them to an
absurdity. He finds everybody else admiring a picture, and that is
enough to set him against it. By putting a number of exaggerations
together he deprives any little grain of truth of its value. This
is the man who, in the present volume, remarks that the Italians
spell a word Vinci and pronounce it Vinchy, adding calmly,
"foreigners always spell better shall they pronounce." He, too,
when shown the writing of Christopher Columbus observes, "Why, I
have seen boys in America only fourteen years old that could write
better than that. You mustn't think you can impose on us because we
are strangers. We are not fools by a good deal. If you have got any
specimens of penmanship of real merit, trot them out, and if you
haven't, drive on!" There are a good many comments on pictures from
the same point of view. Take this on the characters of Sacred Art:
"When we see a monk sitting on a rock, looking tranquilly up to
heaven, with a human skull beside him and without other baggage, we
know that is St. Jerome; because we know that he always went flying
light in the matter of baggage. When we see a party looking
tranquilly up to heaven, unconscious that his body is shot through
and through with arrows, we know that that is St. Sebastian. When
we see other monks looking tranquilly up to heaven, but <i>having
no trade-mark,</i> we always ask who those parties are." Another
question on which the untravelled American is worth hearing is the
ubiquity of guides, with their constant repetition of legends and
their unceasing exaggeration. At Gibraltar one story was dinned
into the tourist's ear, till at last he exclaimed to the narrator,
"Sir, I am a helpless orphan in a foreign land; have pity on me."
One supposed safeguard against invention is that a guide "would
hardly try so hazardous an experiment as the telling of a falsehood
when it is all he can do to speak the truth in English without
getting the lockjaw." But even this seems to have failed in Rome,
if we may judge from the following tirade against the mythical
being to whom the guides give the name of Michael <a name="1">
Angelo:</a></p>

<center><a href="linkia4.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
27]</a></center>

<p>This last touch is exactly characteristic of the untravelled
American. In other places, however, the exaggeration to which Mark
Twain gives way shows that he is consciously acting a part. We do
not like him any the worse for that, and without the preface we
should have been easily reconciled to his eccentricities. His
incidental remarks about things in general are sufficiently
humorous to ensure his book a hearing, though they have the
misfortune to contradict Mr. Hingston's theory. The genuine Yankee
tourist would never sneer at one of his fellow countrymen for
ignorance of French manners and assumption of native superiority.
When Mark Twain finds an American proclaiming his nationality in
this offensive way -- "I am a freeborn sovereign, Sir, an American,
Sir, and I want everybody to know it" -- he adds, "the fellow did
not mention that he was a lineal descendant of Balaam's ass, but
everybody knew that without his telling it." Does this come under
the rule of <i>Quis tulerit Gracchos?</i> We think not. In our
opinion Mark Twain is merely showing the prevalence of the faults
which he satirizes. He wishes to remind us that, whether we take
Mr. Hingston's view or the more natural one, he is not the only
untravellcd American in his party, and that he is always on the
look-out for incidents which may serve his purpose. In this respect
Mark Twain's travels remind us of <i>The Book of Snobs,</i> where
the fancy picture of the author wholly eclipsed his characters.</p>

<hr>
<p>[This reviewer read the pirated English edition of <i>Innocents
Abroad</i>, published in 1870 with the title <i>The New Pilgrim's
Progress</i>. The Introduction referred to was written for that
edition by Edward P. Hingston, who had met MT in Nevada.]</p>

<a href="iarevhpg.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="satrev.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="athenaeu">
<head>
<title>Athenaeum Reviews Tom Sawyer</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1876 British Mixed </keyword>-->
<h2><i>Athenaeum</i> [unsigned]<br>
1876: June 24</h2>

<p>The name of Mark Twain is known throughout the length and
breadth of England. Wherever there is a railway-station with a
bookstall his jokes are household words. Those whose usual range in
literature does not extend beyond the sporting newspapers, the <i>
Racing Calendar,</i> and the "Diseases of Dogs," have allowed him a
place with Artemus Ward alongside of the handful of books which
forms their library. For ourselves, we cannot dissociate him from
the railway-station, and his jokes always rise in our mind with a
background of Brown &amp; Polson's Corn Flour and Taylor's system
of removing furniture. We have read <i>The Adventures of Tom
Sawyer</i> with different surroundings, and still have been made to
laugh; and that ought to be taken as high praise. Indeed, the
earlier part of the book is, to our thinking, the most amusing
thing Mark Twain has written. The humour is not always uproarious,
but it is always genuine and sometimes almost pathetic, and it is
only now and then that the heartiness of a laugh is spoilt by one
of those pieces of self-consciousness which are such common blots
on Mark Twain's other books. <i>The Adventures of Tom Sawyer</i> is
an attempt in a new direction. It is consecutive, and much longer
than the former books, and as it is not put forward as a mere
collection of <i>Screamers,</i> we laugh more easily, and find some
relief in being able to relax the conventional grin expected from
the reader of the little volumes of railway humour. The present
book is not, and does not pretend to be a novel, in the ordinary
sense of the word; it is not even a story, for that presupposes a
climax and a finish; nor is it a mere boys' book of adventures. In
the Preface the author says, "Although my book is intended mainly
for the entertainment of boys and girls, I hope it will not be
shunned by men and women on that account, for part of my plan has
been to try pleasantly to remind adults of what they once were
themselves, and of how they felt and thought and talked, and what
queer enterprises they sometimes engaged in." Questions of
intention are always difficult to decide. The book will amuse
grown-up people in the way that humorous books written for children
have amused before, but (perhaps fortunately) it does not seem to
us calculated to carry out the intention here expressed. With
regard to the style, of course there are plenty of slang words and
racy expressions, which are quite in place in the conversations,
but it is just a question whether it would not have been as well if
the remainder of the book had not been written more uniformly in
English.</p>

<a href="hompgrev.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="londonti.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="atlanta">
<head>
<title>The Constitution Reviews Huck</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 American Western Mixed </keyword> -->

<h2><i>The Atlanta Constitution</i> [unsigned]<br>
 1885: May 26</h2>

<center>
<h3>"Huckleberry Finn" and His Critics.</h3>
</center>

<p>A very deplorable fact is that the great body of literary
criticism is mainly perfunctory. This is not due to a lack of
ability or to a lack of knowledge. It is due to the fact that most
of it is from the pens of newspaper writers who have no time to
elaborate their ideas. They are in a hurry, and what they write is
hurried. Under these circumstances it is not unnatural that they
should take their cues from inadequate sources and give to the
public opinions that are either conventional or that have no
reasonable basis.</p>

<p>All this is the outcome of the conditions and circumstances of
American life. There is no demand for sound criticism any more than
there is a demand for great poetry. We have a leisure class, but
its tastes run towards horses, yachting and athletic sports, in
imitation of the English young men who occasionally honor these
shores with their presence. The imitation, after all, is a limping
one. The young Englishman of leisure is not only fond of outdoor
sports, but of books. He has culture and taste, and patronizes
literature with as much enthusiasm as he does physical amusements.
If our leisure class is to imitate the English, it would be better
if the imitation extended somewhat in the direction of culture.</p>

<p>The American leisure class--the class that might be expected to
patronize good literature and to create a demand for sound,
conservative criticism--is not only fond of horses, but is
decidedly horsey. It is coarse and uncultivated. It has no taste in
either literature or art. It reads few books and buys its pictures
in Europe by the yard.</p>

<p>We are led to these remarks by the wholly inadequate verdict
that has recently been given in some of the most prominent
newspapers as to the merits of Mark Twain's new book, "The
Adventures of Huckleberry Finn." The critics seem to have gotten
their cue in this instance from the action of the Concord library,
the directors of which refused the book a place on their shelves.
This action, as was afterwards explained, was based on the fact
that the book was a work of fiction, and not because of the
humorous characteristics that are popularly supposed to attach to
the writings of Mr. Clemens. But the critics had got their cue
before the explanation was made, and they straightway proceeded to
inform the reading public that the book was gratuitously coarse,
its humor unneccessarily broad, and its purpose crude and
inartistic.</p>

<p>Now, nothing could be more misleading than such a criticism as
this. It is difficult to believe that the critics who have
condemned the book as coarse, vulgar and inartistic can have read
it. Taken in connection with "The Prince and the Pauper," it marks
a clear and distinct advance in Mr. Clemens's literary methods. It
presents an almost artistically perfect picture of the life and
character in the southwest, and it will be equally valuable to the
historian and to the student of sociology. Its humor, which is
genuine and never-failing, is relieved by little pathetic touches
here and there that vouch for its literary value.</p>

<p>It is the story of a half illiterate, high-spirited boy whose
adventures are related by himself. The art with which this
conception is dealt with is perfect in all its details. The boy's
point of view is never for a moment lost sight of, and the moral of
the whole is that this half illiterate boy can be made to present,
with perfect consistency, not only the characters of the people
whom he meets, but an accurate picture of their social life. From
the artistic point of view, there is not a coarse nor vulgar
suggestion from the beginning to the end of the book. Whatever is
coarse and crude is in the life that is pictured, and the picture
is perfect. It may be said that the humor is sometimes excessive,
but it is genuine humor--and the moral of the book, though it is
not scrawled across every page, teaches the necessity of manliness
and self-sacrifice.</p>

<center><a href="hucrevhp.html"><b>Back to Huck Reviews Homepage</b></a>
</center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="atlantic">
<head>
<title>Howells Reviews Innocents</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1869 American Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2>Atlantic Monthly [unsigned; William Dean Howells]<br>
1869: December</h2>
</center>

<p>The character of American humor, and its want of resemblance to
the humor of Kamtschatka and Patagonia, -- will the reader forgive
us if we fail to set down here the thoughts suggested by these
fresh and apposite topics? Will he credit us with a self-denial
proportioned to the vastness of Mr. Clements's very amusing book,
if we spare to state why he is so droll, or -- which is as much to
the purpose -- why we do not know? This reticence will leave us
very little to say by way of analysis; and, indeed, there is very
little to say of <i>The Innocents Abroad</i> which is not of the
most obvious and easy description. The idea of a steamer-load of
Americans going on a prolonged picnic to Europe and the Holy Land
is itself almost sufficiently delightful, and it is perhaps praise
enough for the author to add that it suffers nothing from his
handling. If one considers the fun of making a volume of six
hundred octavo pages upon this subject, in compliance with one of
the main conditions of a subscription book's success, bigness
namely, one has a tolerably fair piece of humor, without troubling
Mr. Clements further. It is out of the bounty and abundance of his
own nature that he is as amusing in the execution as in the
conception of his work. And it is always good-humored humor, too,
that he lavishes on his reader, and even in its impudence it is
charming; we do not remember where it is indulged at the cost of
the weak or helpless side, or where it is insolent, with all its
sauciness and irreverence. The standard shams of travel which
everybody sees through suffer possibly more than they ought, but
not so much as they might; and one readily forgives the harsh
treatment of them in consideration of the novel piece of justice
done on such a traveller as suffers under the pseudonyme of Grimes.
It is impossible also that the quality of humor should not
sometimes be strained in the course of so long a narrative; but the
wonder is rather in the fact that it is strained so seldom.</p>

<p>Mr. Clements gets a good deal of his fun out of his
fellow-passengers, whom he makes us know pretty well, whether he
presents them somewhat caricatured, as in the case of the "Oracle"
of the ship, or carefully and exactly done, as in the case of such
a shrewd, droll, business-like, sensible, kindly type of the
American young man as "Dan." We must say also that the artist who
has so copiously illustrated the volume has nearly always helped
the author in the portraiture of his fellow-passengers, instead of
hurting him, which is saying a good deal for an artist; in fact, we
may go further and apply the commendation to all the illustrations;
and this in spite of the variety of figures in which the same
persons are represented, and the artist's tendency to show the
characters on mules where the author says they rode horseback.</p>

<p>Of course the instructive portions of Mr. Clements's book are of
a general rather than particular character, and the reader gets as
travel very little besides series of personal adventures and
impressions; he is taught next to nothing about the population of
the cities and the character of the rocks in the different
localities. Yet the man who can be honest enough to let himself see
the realities of human life everywhere, or who has only seen
Americans as they are abroad, has not travelled in vain and is far
from a useless guide. The very young American who told the English
officers that a couple of our gunboats could come and knock
Gibraltar into the Mediterranean Sea; the American who at a French
restaurant "talked very loudly and coarsely, and laughed
boisterously, where all others were so quiet and well behaved," and
who ordered "wine, sir!" adding, to raise admiration in a country
where wine is as much a matter of course as soup, "I never dine
without wine, sir"; the American who had to be addressed several
times as Gordon, being so accustomed to hear the name pronounced
Gorrdong, and who had forgotten most English words during a three
months' sojourn in Paris; the Americans who pitilessly made a three
days' journey in Palestine within two days, cruelly overworking the
poor beasts they rode, and overtaxing the strength of their
comrades, in order not to break the Sabbath; the American Pilgrims
who travelled half round the world to be able to take a sail on the
Sea of Galilee, and then missed their sole opportunity because they
required the boatman to take them for one napoleon when he wanted
two; -- these are all Americans who are painted to peculiar
advantage by Mr. Clements, and who will be easily recognized by
such as have had the good fortune to meet them abroad.</p>

<p>The didactic, however, is not Mr. Clements's prevailing mood,
nor his best, by any means. The greater part of his book is in the
vein of irony, which, with a delicious impudence, he attributes to
Saint Luke, declaring that Luke, in speaking of the winding
"street, called Straight" in Damascus, "is careful not to commit
himself; he does not say it is the street which <i>is</i> straight,
but the street which is <i>called</i> Straight.' It is a fine piece
of irony; it is the only facetious remark in the Bible, I believe."
At Tiberias our author saw the women who wear their dowry in their
head-dresses of coins. "Most of these maidens were not wealthy, but
some few have been kindly dealt with by fortune. I saw heiresses
there, worth, in their own right, -- worth, well, I suppose I might
venture to say as much as nine dollars and a half. But such cases
are rare. When you come across one of these, she naturally puts on
airs." He thinks the owner of the horse "Jericho," on which he
travelled towards Jerusalem, "had a wrong opinion about him. He had
an idea that he was one of those fiery, untamed, steeds, but he is
not of that character. I know the Arab had this idea, because when
he brought the horse out for inspection in Beirout, he kept jerking
at the bridle and shouting in Arabic, Ho! will you? Do you want to
run away, you ferocious beast, and break your neck?' when all the
time the horse was not doing anything in the world, and only looked
like he wanted to lean up against something and think. Whenever he
is not shying at things or reaching after a fly, he wants to do
that yet. How it would surprise his owner to know this!" In this
vein of ironical drollery is that now celebrated passage in which
Mr. Clements states that he was affected to tears on coming, a
stranger in a strange land, upon the grave of a blood-relation, --
the tomb of Adam; but that passage is somewhat more studied in tone
than most parts of the book, which are written with a very
successful approach in style to colloquial drolling. As Mr.
Clements writes of his experiences, we imagine he would talk of
them; and very amusing talk it would be: often not at all fine in
matter or manner, but full of touches of humor, -- which if not
delicate are nearly always easy, -- and having a base of excellent
sense and good feeling. There is an amount of pure human nature in
the book, that rarely gets into literature; the depths of our poor
unregeneracy -- dubious even of the blissfulness of bliss -- are
sounded by such a simple confession as Mr. Clements makes in
telling of his visit to the Emperor of Russia: "I would as soon
have thought of being cheerful in Abraham's bosom as in the palace
of an Emperor." Almost any topic, and any event of the author's
past life, he finds pertinent to the story of European and Oriental
travel, and if the reader finds it impertinent, he does not find it
the less amusing. The effect is dependent in so great degree upon
this continuous incoherence, that no chosen passage can illustrate
the spirit of the whole, while the passage itself loses half in
separation from the context. Nevertheless, here is part of the
account given by Mr. Clements of the Pilgrims' excursion to the
river Jordan, over roads supposed to be infested by Bedouins; and
the reader who does not think it droll as it stands can go to our
author for the <a name="1">rest</a>.</p>

<center><a href="linkia3.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
55]</a></center>

<p>Under his <i>nom de plume</i> of Mark Twain, Mr. Clements is
well known to the very large world of newspaper-readers; and this
book ought to secure him something better than the uncertain
standing of a popular favorite. It is no business of ours to fix
his rank among the humorists California has given us, but we think
he is, in an entirely different way from all the others, quite
worthy of the company of the best.</p>

<hr>
<p>[Soon after writing this review Howells would meet MT for the
first time; he hadn't yet met him, however, and for reasons that
are unclear thought his MT's real name was "Samuel S.
Clements."]</p>

<a href="iarevhpg.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="bostdet.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="atlantts">
<head>
<title>Howells Reviews Tom Sawyer</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1876 American Eastern Favorable </keyword>-->
<h2><i>Atlantic Monthly</i> [unsigned; William Dean Howells]<br>
 1876: May</h2>

<p>Mr. Aldrich has studied the life of A Bad Boy as the pleasant
reprobate led it in a quiet old New England town twenty-five or
thirty years ago, where in spite of the natural outlawry of boyhood
he was more or less part of a settled order of things, and was
hemmed in, to some measure, by the traditions of an established
civilization. Mr. Clemens, on the contrary, has taken the boy of
the Southwest for the hero of his new book, and has presented him
with a fidelity to circumstance which loses no charm by being
realistic in the highest degree, and which gives incomparably the
best picture of life in that region as yet known to fiction. The
town where Tom Sawyer was born and brought up is some such idle,
shabby little Mississippi River town as Mr. Clemens has so well
described in his piloting reminiscences, but Tom belongs to the
better sort of people in it, and has been bred to fear God and
dread the Sunday-school according to the strictest rite of the
faiths that have characterized all the respectability of the West.
His subjection in these respects does not so deeply affect his
inherent tendencies but that he makes himself a beloved burden to
the poor, tender-hearted old aunt who brings him up with his orphan
brother and sister, and struggles vainly with his manifold sins,
actual and imaginary. The limitations of his transgressions are
nicely and artistically traced. He is mischievous, but not vicious;
he is ready for almost any depredation that involves the danger and
honor of adventure, but profanity he knows may provoke a
thunderbolt upon the heart of the blasphemer, and he almost never
swears; he resorts to any stratagem to keep out of school, but he
is not a downright liar, except upon terms of after shame and
remorse that make his falsehood bitter to him. He is cruel, as all
children are, but chiefly because he is ignorant; he is not mean,
but there are very definite bounds to his generosity; and his
courage is the Indian sort, full of prudence and mindful of retreat
as one of the conditions of prolonged hostilities. In a word, he is
a boy, and merely and exactly an ordinary boy on the moral side.
What makes him delightful to the reader is that on the imaginative
side he is very much more, and though every boy has wild and
fantastic dreams, this boy cannot rest till he has somehow realized
them. Till he has actually run off with two other boys in the
character of buccaneer, and lived for a week on an island in the
Mississippi, he has lived in vain; and this passage is but the
prelude to more thrilling adventures, in which he finds hidden
treasures, traces the bandits to their cave, and is himself lost in
its recesses. The local material and the incidents with which his
career is worked up are excellent, and throughout there is
scrupulous regard for the boy's point of view in reference to his
surroundings and himself, which shows how rapidly Mr. Clemens has
grown as an artist. We do not remember anything in which this
propriety is violated, and its preservation adds immensely to the
grown-up reader's satisfaction in the amusing and exciting story.
There is a boy's love-affair, but it is never treated otherwise
than as a boy's love-affair. When the half-breed has murdered the
young doctor, Tom and his friend, Huckleberry Finn, are really, in
their boyish terror and superstition, going to let the poor old
town-drunkard be hanged for the crime, till the terror of that
becomes unendurable. The story is a wonderful study of the
boy-mind, which inhabits a world quite distinct from that in which
he is bodily present with his elders, and in this lies its great
charm and its universality, for boy-nature, however human nature
varies, is the same everywhere.</p>

<p>The tale is very dramatically wrought, and the subordinate
characters are treated with the same graphic force that sets Tom
alive before us. The worthless vagabond, Huck Finn, is entirely
delightful throughout, and in his promised reform his identity is
respected: he will lead a decent life in order that he may one day
be thought worthy to become a member of that gang of robbers which
Tom is to organize. Tom's aunt is excellent, with her kind heart's
sorrow and secret pride in Tom; and so is his sister Mary, one of
those good girls who are born to usefulness and charity and
forbearance and unvarying rectitude. Many village people and local
notables are introduced in well-conceived character; the whole
little town lives in the reader's sense, with its religiousness,
its lawlessness, its droll social distinctions, its civilization
qualified by its slave-holding, and its traditions of the wilder
West which has passed away. The picture will be instructive to
those who have fancied the whole Southwest a sort of vast Pike
County, and have not conceived of a sober and serious and orderly
contrast to the sort of life that has come to represent the
Southwest in literature. Mr. William M. Baker gives a notion of
this in his stories, and Mr. Clemens has again enforced the fact
here, in a book full of entertaining character, and of the greatest
artistic sincerity.</p>

<p>Tom Brown and Tom Bailey are, among boys in books, alone
deserving to be named with Tom Sawyer.</p>

<a href="hompgrev.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="londonex.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="blurbs">
<head>
<title>Newspaper Reviews of Innocents</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1869 American Eastern Favorable </keyword>-->
<center>
<h2>Paragraphs from Notices of this Book.</h2>
</center>

<p>[These excerpts from newspaper reviews of <i>Innocents
Abroad</i> were originally published by MT in the Buffalo <i>
Express</i> (9 October 1869), then included at the end of the
salesman's dummy edition of the book, under the title given above.
Six notices of the lecture MT derived from the book were also
published in the dummy, under the title "Opinions of the Press";
they are included here.]</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Hartford (Ct.) Courant.</p>

<p>That the odd genius who described the "Jumping Frog," should go
to see and describe the art-treasures of Europe and the ruins of
Egypt and the Holy Land, has something in it very comical. Mark
Twain is a true Californian, with the original, quaint humor of the
Pacific; a very shrewd observer, not by any means unpoetical, but
yet delighting to take the traditional poetry out of things. You
may be sure that if he went to Italy or Jerusalem he would not
idealize, but would try to photograph. His very exaggerations are
all of the disenchanting sort, and are a very fair set-off to the
usual rhapsodies of most tourists, who see what they have been
educated to expect, and who have tradition so soaked into them that
if they sat shivering in Naples in January, with snow in the
streets and ice in the fountains, they would write home about
sunny, delicious Italy. We doubt if the classic lands ever had
exactly such a traveler through them as Mark Twain, who went out on
the famous Quaker City excursion to the Holy Land, with a lot of
passengers collected especially, it seemed to him, for the Holy
Land, and this book is a dreadfully real, also a whimsical record
of what they did and what they didn't do and see, with sketches of
the pilgrims that all of them cannot regard with complacency. This
record has been put into a large and handsomely printed volume of
651-pages, illustrated with two hundred and thirty-four cuts of
various sorts, views from photographs, portraits, odd costumes,
characters, scenes occurring on shipboard and on land, grave,
funny, absurd, but a very good accompaniment to the text. The book
has a great deal of entertainment in it. It has bits of excellent
real description, and when Twain tries to reproduce a scene or
describe a place, he does it with wonderful faithfulness. The
author is not straining to be funny; he is not trying to make a
joke book; and there is nothing in it of that painfully unnatural
sort of wit that is so wearisome. Very few will be able to read it
without laughing at least half the time. It may be absurd, but it
certainly is funny. In the midst of the most serious passages, some
quaint observation is dropped that has a good deal of the quality
of the best humor. To attempt anything like a criticism of Mark
Twain's peculiar humor, or to try to explain why it is that he is
able to make people laugh in spite of themselves, is unnecessary
now. The book is full of bright things, shrewd observations, that
lurk here and there, and must be read with the context to be
appreciated.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the National (N.J.) Standard.</p>

<p>This is the raciest book we have met with for many a day. Much
as we had expected to be pleased, we must truthfully say that we
had no idea so much humor, wit, geniality, fine description and
good sense, could be contained within the covers of any one book.
It is a splendid book in every meaning of the word. It is readable,
enjoyable, laughable; it is keen, satirical, comical, and funny;
its descriptions are beautiful, and its style is unique, and not of
a common stamp; its morals are of a high tone, and cannot be
impeached; it will give the reader a new view of the countries and
people that it describes, showing them upon a side never before
exposed. It is not a book filled with caricature and stale jokes,
but a clear, well-written volume upon most interesting subjects,
yet viewing them from an entirely new stand-point, and portraying
them in an original and characteristic manner. We turned over the
pages, without selection of pieces, and commenced reading, and
invariably in less than two minutes we were boiling over with
laughter. Our sides ache, and we lay aside the volume to rest, and
to advise our friends and readers, one and all, to buy the book at
the first opportunity, and read it through. It is full of excellent
illustrations, in fact, taken all in all, is the jolliest,
pleasantest, most fascinating, and handsomest volume we know
of.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Meriden (Ct.) Republican.</p>

<p>We hope our readers will purchase one new book just as soon as
the Agent for this place shall put in an appearance. We refer to
Mark Twain's new book entitled the "New Pilgrim's Progress." Mark
Twain, always interesting, in this book has outrivaled himself. It
is instructive, humorous, racy, full of quaint expressions that
make you laugh unexpectedly, and before you are quite ready;
critical, sometimes caustic, but always good natured; never prosy
or wearisome. You begin the book and do not want to leave it till
the last line is reached. Mark never describes a place, or sees a
sight as others do. He is intensely original; and for us there is
where the charm lies. It is a work permanently adapted for home
reading aloud, and will invariably call up around the fireside a
spirit of mirth and congeniality. No one can read its pages without
feeling there is still beauty and sunshine in the world.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the New York Express.</p>

<p>It is one of the most quaint and enjoyable books of travel that
has been issued from the press. Certainly, Mark Twain succeeds in
dispelling many of the old traditions which travelers have so long
inflicted upon a confiding and long suffering public. He has gone
over the ground with a genuine Yankee spirit, determining to see
everything that is to be seen, to see it thoroughly and like a man
of sense, to go into ecstacies [sic] over but few things, and to
speak the plain, unvarnished truth under all circumstances. And
this truth is told to us in such a winsome form, that we cannot but
listen to it with agreeable sensations. Throughout runs an
undercurrent of genuine native humor. Not what we are so apt to
accept as such, and which is principally remarkable for its
vulgarity and insipidity, but a real, crisp, tangible wit, that
speaks in every line of the vitality, the vigorous honesty of the
man, and of how fully he is imbued with all the better of the
national characteristics. The book is a Golconda of wit and a very
mine of sparkling entertainment.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Newark (N.J.) Register.</p>

<p>It is a rare and wonderful combination. The humor is natural,
never forced; the narrative is instructive, and the descriptive
passages are some of the finest in the English language, abounding
in choice expressions and beautiful metaphor.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Winsted (Ct.) Herald.</p>

<p>The book opens richer and richer with every leaf you turn. The
next best thing to having been one of this Holy Land excursion
party, is to read this enchanting account of it. Indeed we guess
the book will afford more enjoyment, in proportion to the cost,
than did the trip itself. The book and the trip are just alike in
one respect,--when you once get aboard you cannot get away from it.
Perhaps, however, there will be no danger in accompanying the
author as far as off Sandy Hook.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the New York Leader.</p>

<p>Twain's irony is delicious and far-reaching; his facetious
satire penetrates the very soul of appreciation. His drolleries are
wickedly amusing. No one in full sympathy with humor can read Mark
Twain's best things and not laugh heartily over them. Of course his
latest work is his best, as it is his most elaborate effort.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Norwich Bulletin.</p>

<p>If people don't stop laughing so immoderately in the dead hours
of the night as to keep their neighbors awake, there will probably
be trouble, that's all. The cause is said to be Mark Twain's new
book, which everybody is reading. But that is no excuse.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the New York Herald.</p>

<p>The "Innocents Abroad" must be read to be thoroughly enjoyed. It
is an oasis in the desert of works on foreign travel, with which we
are deluged at the present day. We have read it through with
pleasure, and if Mark Twain will do no worse in future efforts at
Book Making, we will always heartily welcome him at our desk.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Mohawk Valley Register.</p>

<p>Buy it, and you will bless Mark Twain to the end of your
existence.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Liberal Christian, N.Y.</p>

<p>It is the record of a party on a holiday excursion, and every
page is touched with the mirth of the happy merry-makers, and in
every paragraph you feel a giggle if you do not hear a laugh. Here
are no homilies; no essays on politics, no discussion of
philosophies, or art, or archaeology; yet the book preaches
nevertheless, and is full of health and aglow with that cheerful,
hopeful, wholesome religion which has so much faith that it does
not fear to crack a joke or to make one. It tells a great deal that
other and more serious writers consider it beneath their dignity to
tell, and it keeps striking the spear-point of its shrewd Yankee
common sense into the cracks and crevices of antique customs and
institutions until we half expect a general tumbling down of
European civilization upon the Pilgrims' heads.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the New York Evening Post.</p>

<p>It contains many scenes of real merriment that few can read
without laughter. The cleverness, frankness, and catholic spirit of
the writer are everywhere apparent.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Central Baptist, St. Louis, Mo.</p>

<p>It abounds in historical and legendary lore, and written in the
quaint and serio-comic strain peculiar to the author, will readily
recommend itself to the public.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the New York Tribune.</p>

<p>It is refreshing to find a tourist who does not care what other
tourists have said before him. Mark Twain must be rated as the
chief representative of that peculiar kind of humor whose principal
elements are not bad spelling and verbal burlesque, for he does not
practice these arts. The greater part of his book is pure fun, and
its freshness is wonderfully well sustained.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the True American, Trenton, N.J.</p>

<p>The work abounds in historical facts, descriptions of different
countries and important personages, scenes and incidents, so bound
together by wit, pleasantry and flashes of grotesque humor, as to
make one of the most readable and amusing books of the period.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Providence (R.I.) Morning Herald.</p>

<p>He has described with his rare skill and in his best style, the
adventures of the company, as well as his own, which are among the
best things in the book. He has left the beaten path of tourists,
and has never pretended an admiration which he did not feel, or
which was yielded in obedience merely to invariable custom. He
claims to adhere to the truth and to facts, and in his book has
shorn many of the venerable shams of the old world of the false
charms they have pretended. The stand-point of the traveler is
certainly new, and the book throughout bears the impress of
originality. The piquant humor and rare felicity of the text is
well sustained by the numerous engravings, upwards of two hundred
in number, with which the book is embellished.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Providence (R.I.) Journal.</p>

<p>The book is funny clear through; and if any doubt that fun can
be sustained through so many pages, they can be cured by entering
their names upon the subscription list.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Norwich (Ct.) Daily Advertiser.</p>

<p>The drollest, funniest, most truthful and readable book of the
season is Mark Twain's account of the pleasure trip of a party on
the Quaker City, up the Mediterranean. The writer sees the humorous
side of every thing, or gives a humorous side to serious things,
but is not lacking in power to be sober and wise, and even
eloquent, when those qualities seem necessary for effect. If any
one wants a book that will really interest and instruct him about
one of the most remarkable portions of the earth, and at the same
time to keep in rollicking good humor, he cannot afford to be
without this book.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the New York Times.</p>

<p>About one-third of this pleasant book is given to the sacred
parts of Asia Minor and Egypt--showing the mental proclivity of the
majority on board the Quaker City. The volume is a large one of 650
pages, beautifully printed, and swarming with illustrations which,
in their own way, are as effective and amusing as the letter press.
It is altogether a very taking book; and a great many persons who
would not care to read the graver accounts of travel through these
world-renowned places, will find themselves very much interested in
Mark Twain's humorous way of getting over the same ground.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Rochester Chronicle.</p>

<p>Twain's book is valuable for pricking many of the bubbles and
exploding the humbugs of European travel.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Newark (N.J.) Daily Advertiser.</p>

<p>We have one earnest caution for our readers who may buy this
book. The writers seeks to rest your ribs by occassional [sic] fine
passages of true eloquence, or sentiment, or sensible description.
But he does not succeed. The book must be taken in interrupted
doses. There is more fun in it than it is safe to swallow at
once.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Hartford (Ct.) Times.</p>

<p>We are indebted to the publishers for a copy of a new and really
unique volume of travels by that rollicking humorist, "Mark Twain."
It is a lively, laughter-exciting book, such as one rarely meets
among volumes of travels; yet the fun is not the only feature of
the book. It abounds in interesting information, conveyed in a wide
range of facts, adventures, and personal experiences. It is fresh,
racy and sparkling as a glass of iced champagne, and a good deal
better for the health and digestion. Seated under a shady tree,
with this instructive picture book before him, one can, in most
moods, be better entertained than with a living companion. It gives
us living scenes and pictures of life and experience in far distant
lands, so graphically portrayed that the book will make an
attractive addition to the treasures of the library and the
drawing-table, for the benefit of one's self or friends in a winter
evening. Everybody should buy and read it.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the New Jersey Journal.</p>

<p>Criticism of the work is almost impossible; as sufficient
gravity of countenance for the purpose, can hardly be maintained
over the volume. To think of, or look at it, is to smile, but to
read it is to overwhelm all criticism with uncontrolable [sic]
laughter. It is truly an original affair, and does credit to its
author. He treats of subjects of which we supposed we were fully
acquainted in such a manner that we come to the conclusion finally
that we are swallowing sugar-coated statistics,--and are aware that
we are digesting much useful and important information,--learning
facts we never knew before,--getting glimpses of scenes and places
from entirely new stand-points, and catching new and quaint ideas,
expressed in the most original and funny manner. Altogether the
book is a good one; one we can heartily recommend to our readers.
It is pure in morals, and just the thing for fire-side reading. Buy
this Book, say we, and, our word for it, you will not regret the
outlay.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Springfield (Mass.) Union.</p>

<p>This is one of the most readable and entertaining books of the
season. For years the quaint humor of Mark Twain has enlivened the
columns of the newspapers, and few readers finish a column of his
correspondence without wishing, like Oliver Twist, for more. The
present volume, while brimfull [sic] of humor in almost every page,
is by no means a mere jest book, but contains more information in
regard to the places visited by the "Pilgrims" than would be
gathered from many dry books of travel. It is profusely
illustrated, and the views, which profess to be real, are authentic
and well-executed; while the comic and fancy sketches aptly
illustrate the drollery of the text.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Springfield (Mass.) Republican.</p>

<p>Mr. Clemens brings to his work a free spirit, a lively fancy and
an indescribable emancipation from old trammels of thought and
feeling. He is as different from the stock traveler as he is from
Montague or Bunyan's Pilgrim,--sees things that nobody else saw,
says things that nobody else ever thought of saying, and throws
over his whole work the charm of an uncouth freshness.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the New York World.</p>

<p>No American book of travels contains so much genuine fun. It
aims to entertain and it does. There is a genuine American tone
about it which is refreshing to see after the snobberies of some
other American travelers.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the New York Sun.</p>

<p>He pricks a great many bubbles blown by previous travelers, both
in print and out of it; and where anything seemed to him an
imposition or a delusion, he bluntly says so. One cannot read half
a dozen pages of the book without enjoying as many hearty laughs at
droll fancies of the author and the comical tint which he gives to
every picture. Aside from its mirth the book abounds in clear and
graphic description, and now and then the author indulges in
sentimental writing and bursts of eloquence quite in contrast with
his levity on other pages. Altogether this book is both instructive
and entertaining, which is more than can be said of all travelers'
tales.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Paterson Daily Guardian, N.J.</p>

<p>It is a large book, but a reading of a few pages is sufficient
to convince the reader that Mark is equal to it, and could stand a
good deal larger one. The public could also.</p>

<hr>
<hr>
<p>OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.</p>

<p>The author of this work during the past winter delivered in
scores of cities in the West, his popular lecture termed "The
American Vandal Abroad," to large and delighted audiences. The
material for that lecture was drawn from this book, and is a fair
specimen of its style and quality. The lecture is spoken of in the
following manner by the press:</p>

<hr>
<p>At Cleveland, Ohio.</p>

<p>LIBRARY ASSOCIATION--LECTURE OF "MARK TWAIN."--We shall attempt
no transcript of this lecture, lest with unskillful hands we mar
its beauty, for beauty and poetry it certainly possessed, though
the production of a professed humorist.</p>

<p>We know not which most to commend, the quaint utterances, the
funny incidents, the good-natured recital of the characteristics of
his harmless "Vandal," or the gems of beautiful description which
sparkled all through his lecture. We expected to be amused, but we
were taken by surprise when he carried us on the wings of his
redundant fancy, away to the ruins, the cathedrals, and the
monuments of the old world. There are some passages of gorgeous
word-painting which haunt us like a remembered picture. We
congratulate Mr. Twain upon having taken the tide of public favor
"at the flood" in the lecture field, and having conclusively proved
that a man may be a humorist without being a clown. He has elevated
the profession by his graceful delivery and by recognizing in his
audience something higher than merely a desire to laugh. We can
assure the cities who are awaiting his coming, that a rich feast is
in store for them, and Cleveland is proud to offer him the first
laurel leaf in his role as lecturer, this side the "Rocky
slope."</p>

<hr>
<p>At Toledo, Ohio.</p>

<p>MARK TWAIN'S LECTURE.--White's Hall was filled from cellar to
garret, last night, by one of the best tickled audiences that ever
assembled there to hear a lecture or see the speaker. Mark Twain
tickled them. And he did it so easily and almost constantly, that
they didn't know what they were laughing at more than half the
time. Twain is witty, and his wit comes from his own fertile brain.
His style is original; and his manner of speaking is not after the
manner of men generally. His serious face and long drawn words are,
of themselves, sufficient to make one laugh, even if there were not
in every sentence expressed a sparkling gem of humor and original
idea. His anecdotes, with which the lecture is replete, are rich,
and, as he tells them, irresistibly funny. In some of his
descriptions of European places and characters the lecturer
delivers, at times, most eloquent passages, brilliant in thought
and word. That Mark Twain is a success as a lecturer, as well as
writer, we think no one who heard "The American Vandal Abroad,"
last night, will dispute.</p>

<hr>
<p>At Sharon, Penn.</p>

<p>MARK TWAIN.--This combination of letters spells a name and
designates a man for whom we have the most intense veneration. We
had the privilege and pleasure of hearing his quaint and
instructive lecture, the "American Vandal Abroad," on Saturday
Evening last. A large and appreciative audience greeted him, all
anxious to hear and see the man who had placed himself so high in
their esteem by the many brilliant witticisms from time to time
seized with avidity by the public press, and through it placed
before the world. Mr. Twain was heard and admired. New and warm
friends were added to his list and the old ones retained. Such a
deep interest was manifested in the lecture that at the close a
general dissatisfaction was apparent that he did not speak longer.
It seemed too short, but upon consulting the time it was discovered
to the great surprise of all that he had talked one hour and a
half. A sermon of the same dimensions to the self-same audience
would have found many dozing, and at the hour of high noon! The
lecture was a grand success. Everybody was pleased. He is about to
issue a work of some six hundred pages, "The Innocents Abroad, or
the New Pilgrim's Progress." We long to see it, and predict for it
an extensive sale.</p>

<hr>
<p>At Chicago.</p>

<p>"MARK TWAIN" ON THE SPHYNX [sic].--Among the gems of fine
description in the lecture of Mark Twain, Tuesday evening, that of
the mysterious Sphynx thrilled his audience with admiration.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Elmira, N.Y., Daily Gazette.</p>

<p>MARK TWAIN'S NEW BOOK, "THE INNOCENTS ABROAD, OR THE NEW
PILGRIM'S PROGRESS."--Advance sheets of the new work have
incidentally come under our notice--and from them we are prepared
to speak highly of Mr. Clemens' prospective book. It has for its
foundation a description of the sights and scenes of famous places
abroad, while they are treated in that peculiarly attractive vein
of power and genuine humor, which has made him widely famous, and
placed him at the head of the witty writers of America. Mr.
Clemens, however, is something besides a literary humorist. There
occurs in his writing a blending of sentiment and thought as fine
and striking as they are beautiful and sparkling--ideas as clear
and penetrating as his humor is fresh. From what we have seen of
his new book we are led to believe that it will do much towards
advancing his reputation, and establish it on an enduring basis.
That it will be a success is already assured.</p>

<hr>
<p>From the Mohawk Valley, N.Y, Register.</p>

<p>By a private note from "Mark Twain," we learn that he is about
to issue his new book, "The New Pilgrim's Progress," and then
transform himself into a pilgrim again and start for California.
The first part of the information we hail with the utmost
satisfaction, but we regret that he is soon to leave the Atlantic
coast. However, as many people will kill themselves with laughter
over his book, he might be subject here to the annoyance of
frequent arrests for being accessory before the fact to numerous
cases of manslaughter. In California he would be safe among his
earlier friends, who know him better, and would let him off more
easily.</p>

<a href="iarevhpg.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="bufexpr.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="bosdail3">
<head>
<title>Daily Advertiser Reviews Huck</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 American Eastern Unfavorable </keyword> -->
<h2><i>Boston Daily Advertiser</i>[unsigned]<br>
 1885: March 12</h2>

<br>


<p>Mark Twain's "Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" had a certain
relishable flavor when mixed up with the miscellaneous assortment
of magazine literature; but in a book form, and covering more than
350 pages, they are wearisome and labored. It would be abou t as
easy to read through a jest book, as to keep up one's interest in
the monotonous humor and the dialectic variations of "Huck Finn's"
narrative. Here and there are spatches of Mark Twain's best work,
which could be read over and over again, and yet b ring each time
an outburst of laugher; but one cannot have the book long in his
hands without being tempted to regret that the author should so
often have laid himself open to the charge of coarseness and bad
taste. The illustrations are admirable in thei r way. As to the
general character of the book, it may be sufficient to remind the
reader of the author's notice, that "all persons attempting to find
a motive in this narrative will be prosecuted; persons attempting
to find a moral in it will be banished ; persons attempting to find
a plot in it will be shot."</p>

<a href="hucrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="sfbull.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="bostdet">
<head>
<title>Transcript Reviews Innocents</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1869 American Eastern Favorable </keyword>-->
<center>
<h2>Boston <i>Daily Evening Transcript</i> ["Tom Folio"]<br>
 1869: December 15</h2>
</center>

<p>MARK TWAIN'S NEW BOOK. What would the great old romantic
voyagers and travellers, the heroes of Hackluyt and Purchas, say of
the monster Yankee picnic to Europe and the Holy Land? I think that
if those worthies were to get hold of a copy of Mark Twain's
account of the excursion, there would be laughter in Elysium. At
any rate, I can hardly believe it possible for an earthly reader --
unless, indeed, like Charles Lamb's Scotchman, he is joke-proof --
to peruse Twain's new book, <i>The Innocents Abroad,</i> without
"laughing consumedly." The work, however, though rich in joke and
jest is not, like Gilbert a Becket's dreary comic histories, a
merely funny book. On the contrary, it is a very full and
matter-of-fact record of travel in Europe and the East,
delightfully flavored with humor and plentifully spiced with wit.
Addison's sober citizen complained that there were too many plums
and no suet in his pudding, but no one can say that Twain's
literary pudding is wanting in suet or too full of plums.</p>

<p>Our author is not one of the "one-eyed travellers," mentioned by
Whateley, who see "a great deal of some particular class of
objects, and are blind to all others," but a shrewd, quick-witted
person, who travelled with his eyes very wide open, and saw things
as they were, not as they have been described by poets and
romancers. It is not, however, so much for its new, truthful and
pleasant pictures of Old World places and people, as for the
delicious wit and humor scattered so freely up and down the book,
that one praises and prizes <i>The Innocents Abroad.</i> And it is
such good humor, too, most of it, and with all its freedom and
riot, touching gently and lovingly all serious things. I have been
reading Fuller's <i>Pisgah Sight of Palestine,</i> and derived no
little amusement by comparing his descriptions of the Holy Land
with Mark Twain's. Fuller, though as pious and reverent as a saint,
was a rare wit and humorist, and his book on Palestine is brimming
over with merry quibbles and jocular humor. Although some of Mark
Twain's levities might have displeased the witty old divine, I
think that he would have laughed loud and long at the passage
concerning the tomb of Adam.</p>

<p><i>The Innocents Abroad</i> is issued by the American Publishing
Company of Hartford, and is sold only by subscription. The Boston
agents are George M. Smith &amp; Co., No. 6 Tremont Street.</p>

<a href="iarevhpg.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="overland.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="bosttrav">
<head>
<title>Evening Traveller Reviews Huck</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 American Eastern Unfavorable </keyword> -->
<h2><i>Boston Evening Traveller</i>[unsigned]<br>
 1885: March 5</h2>

<br>


<p>It is little wonder that Mr. Samuel Clemens, otherwise Mark
Twain, resorted to real or mock lawsuits, as may be, to restrain
some real or imaginary selling of "The Adventures of Huckleberry
Finn" as a means of advertising that extraordinarily senseless
publication. Before the work is disposed of, Mr. Mark Twain will
probably have to resort to law to compel some to sell it by any
sort of bribery or corruption. It is doubtful if the edition could
be disposed of to people of average intellect at anything short of
the point of the bayonet. This publication rejoices in two
frontispieces, of which the one is supposed to be a faithful
portrait of Huckleberry Finn, and the other an engraving of the
classic features of Mr. Mark Twain as seen in the bust made by Karl
Gerhardt. The taste of this gratuitous presentation is as bad as is
the book itself, which is an extreme statement. Mr. Clemens has
contributed some humorous literature that is excellent and will
hold its place, but his Huckleberry Finn appears to b e singularly
flat, stale and unprofitable. The book is sold by subscription.</p>

<a href="hucrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="sfdaily.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="britqrev">
<head>
<title>BQR Reviews Tom Sawyer</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1876 British Mixed </keyword>-->
<h2><i>British Quarterly Review</i> [unsigned]<br>
 1876: October</h2>

<p>Tom Sawyer is a bit of a scamp, a kind of juvenile Gil Blas, an
<i>enfant terrible</i>, a schoolboy full of practical jokes and
solemn impositions, who wins a Sunday-school Bible by buying
tickets, and proves his assiduous study by the astounding answer to
the question, "Who were the first two apostles?" "David and
Goliath." He absconds from school, and with a village ne'er-do-well
sets up for a pirate on an island in the river, then steals home at
night to listen to his old aunt weeping over him as drowned, and is
furtively present on Sunday to hear his funeral sermon preached. In
one of his escapades he is witness of a midnight murder--gets lost
in a cave on the Mississippi, finds the murderer and his treasure,
and ends his schoolboy days by being a hero. The book is full of
roaring fun, interspersed with touches of true pathos. It will have
the effect of making boys think that an unscrupulous scapegrace is
sure to turn out a noble man; it might therefore have given more
emphasis to truth and straightforwardness. But it is irresistible;
fully up to the mark of the "Innocents Abroad."</p>

<a href="hompgrev.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="harttime.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="bufexpr">
<head>
<title>Express Reviews Innocents</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1869 American Eastern Favorable </keyword>-->
<center>
<h2>Buffalo Express [unsigned]<br>
 1869: October 16</h2>
</center>

<p>If any book of late years has so generally interested the press
of the country and received so extensive and favorable an
introduction to the public as has Mark Twain's <i>Innocents
Abroad,</i> since its appearance, we fail to remember the instance.
We gave to our readers last week, in a supplementary sheet, some
specimens of the notices we have found in our exchanges. Numerous
as were the excerpts here collected, they represent but a fraction
of what have fallen under our observation, and the notable fact is,
that, instead of the mere mention so commonly accorded to a new
book, almost every journal has given it an unusually elaborate
review, written not in a simple spirit of courtesy, but evidentally
with an inspiration of interest excited by reading the work. The
truth is, we believe, that no one of an ordinary disposition of
mind can dip into the volume without being snared by a curious
fascination. It is so different from any narrative of travel that
ever was written before. The mere tickle of an ever pervading humor
is not all that makes it delightful, but that humor is like an
atmosphere, in which the old world scenes that so many tourists and
travellers have led us into, take on a new and altogether novel
appearance, so that we follow our droll excursionist from place to
place as eagerly as though we had never been carried to them by any
narrative before. It would be a great mistake to suppose that the
book is just a big package of Mark Twain's jokes, to be read with
laughter, and for the sake of laughter. It is the panorama of
Europe and the Holy Land as they were seen by one who went abroad
with no illusions; who carried about with him a shrewd pair of
American eyes, and used them to get his own impressions of things,
as they actually presented themselves, not as he had been taught to
expect them; who bore with him, moreover, as acute an appreciation
of sham and humbug as his sense of the humorous and ludicrous was
keen. What he saw he tells, and we believe there is more true
description in his book than in any other of the kind that we have
read. What is to be told soberly he tells soberly, and with all the
admiration or reverence that is due to the subject. But he does
like to wash off false colors, to scrape away putty and varnish, to
stick a pin into venerable moss grown shams -- and it is a
perpetual delight to his reader to see him do it in his droll, dry
way. We have yet to find the person who could open the book and
willingly lay it down again, for, certainly, it is not often that
more or livelier entertainment can be had in the same compass. The
work has been published by the American Publishing Company, at
Hartford, and is sold by agents who canvass for subscriptions.</p>

<hr>
<p>[MT was part-owner and editor of the <i>Express</i>. Frederick
Anderson suggests J.N. Larned may have written this notice (<i>MT:
The Critical Heritage</i>, p. 25) -- or MT could have written it
himself.]</p>

<a href="iarevhpg.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="atlantic.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="cyathena">
<head>
<title>Athenaeum Reviews Yankee</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1890 British Unfavorable</keyword> -->
<h2><i>Athenaeum</i> [unsigned]<br>
 1890: February 15</h2>

<br>


<p><i>A Yankee at the Court of King Arthur</i>, by Mark Twain
(Samuel L. Clemens), published by Messrs. Chatto &amp; Windus, is a
rather laborious piece of fun with a sort of purpose in it. One of
the illustrations, early in the volume, represents a Yankee
tickling with a straw the nose of a gigantic statue of a lion, and
indicates the general nature of the serious purport of the 525
pages of that very American kind of American humour of which "Mark
Twain" is the chief master. Laughing at British institutions, and
showing that the good old times were uncommonly bad times for the
people, and that not a few of the historical privileges which still
exist do not suit the ideas of the great republic of the West,
afford a good deal of harmless amusement and opportunities for very
trite comment. It is a mistake to decide that ridicule cast upon
the story of Arthur is an offence in any way other than in the
matter of taste in jokes. Sir Thomas Malory and Lord Tennyson will
survive. Masterpieces will stand any amount of parody. "The Burial
of Sir John Moore" and Gray's "Elegy" are just as impressive and
admirable as if they had not been parodied with all sorts of
jocularity and ribaldry scores of times. One may easily read Mark
Twain's book without any ill will; but it is a harder task to read
it with sustained merriment. By writing so much the author has
shown how mechanical his method really is, and, with all respect
for the cleverness of the writers of Gaiety burlesques, one doubts
if anybody could be amused by reading one of them if it ran to five
hundred pages. That is, however, the sort of task which Mark Twain
offers to his readers. One may be pardoned for confessing that the
task has proved too severe. A trial of several chapters taken at
random shows that the author is still as fresh as ever in his racy
contrasts between things ancient and modern, and as quaint in his
droll expressions. He can raise a laugh once, twice, or even twenty
times, but not a thousand.</p>

<a href="cyrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="cyboslw.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="cybosher">
<head>
<title>Baxter Reviews Yankee</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1889 American Eastern Favorable</keyword> -->
<h2>Boston Sunday <i>Herald</i> [Sylvester Baxter]<br>
 1889: December 15</h2>

<br>
 [<i>This long, enthusiastic review filled up almost a full page in
the</i> Herald<i>. It included six of Dan Beard's illustrations.
But although it summarizes a good bit of the plot, it never sees
any hint of irony in the novel's juxtaposition of ancien t England
and modern America. Like all the contemporary reviews, for example,
it doesn't notice the apocalyptic violence of the last act of
Hank's performance for the Sixth Century.</i>] <br>
<br>


<center><b><font size="+1">MARK TWAIN'S MASTERWORK<br>
A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court.</font><br>
<br>
Adventures Among the Knights of the Round Table --<br>
Modern Inventions Introduced Into the Sixth Century --<br>
Shams of Aristocratic Pretensions Ruthlessly
Slaughtered</b></center>

<p>Of all the extraordinary conceits that have germinated in his
fruitful imagination, nothing more delicious has ever occurred to
Mark Twain than that of running riot among the legendary times of
our ancestral race by placing "A Connecticut Yankee in King
Arthur's Court." These quoted words form the title of the latest
successor to <i>Innocents Abroad</i>. Here is a rare field for the
unbridled play of fancy, and right bravely has the author used his
opportunity. There is a most audacious rollicking around among the
dusty bric-a-brac of chivalry -- which is not handled at all gently
-- and a merry tossing about of poetic finery in a way that
ruthlessly exposes in their literal ugliness the illusively mantled
facts. Of course there is most abundant fun, and Mark Twain's rich
humor never coursed more freely than here, where just provocation
is never absent. But there is much more than this; the sources of
the claims of aristocratic privileges and royal prerogatives that
yet linger in the world are so exposed to the full glare of the sun
of 19th century common sense, are shown in so ridiculous an aspect,
that the work can hardly fail to do yeoman service in destroying
the still existing remnants of respect for such pretensions.
Through the book there is a steady flowing undercurrent of earnest
purpose, and the pages are eloquent with a true American love of
freedom, a sympathy with the rights of the common people, and an
indignant hatred of oppression of the poor, the lowly and the weak,
by the rich, the powerful and the proud. While much false glamour
is dispelled by resolving it into absurdity under the touchstone of
truth, the book is marked by real beauty, by a poetry of style
worthy of its rich material, with much sympathetic tenderness, as
well as frankness of speech. The quaint early English speech is
handled with the same artistic skill that characterized the
author's facile handling of the stately Elizabethan in that lovely
idyll of childhood, <i>The Prince and the Pauper</i>, and the
constant admixture of a concisely expressive American vernacular
thereto makes a contrast of lingual coloring that is</p>

<center><b>Unspeakably Delightful.</b></center>

<p>We may fancy that the same matter-of-fact Englishman who
seriously reasoned that certain statements in <i>Innocents
Abroad</i> were preposterously absurd, and could not be based upon
fact, might again step forward to break a lance against this book
by showing, from historical and philological data, that such a
language could not possibly have been spoken in the sixth century,
since the English tongue did not exist, and that the use of Norman
French names before the conquest is anachronistic in the highest
degree! But this is an excursion back into the England of the
chronicles, and not of strict chronology, and that eminent
ethnologist, Tylor, would undoubtedly perceive with delight the
accuracy of scientific perception in the treatment of human nature
which marks the book. For, in order to characterize with truth a
past period we must make ourselves familiar with some existing
state of society that is analogous therewith. Only under such
conditions can a faithful historical romance be written, for
otherwise the writer cannot fail to modernize his work, and falsify
its life with 19th century sentiments that could not have been
known in a previous age. By resorting to the principle that
"distribution in time" is paralleled by "distribution in space," we
may solve many a problem. So there is a certain aspect of sober
truth in this most fanciful tale, and, just as the Connecticut
Yankee went back into the days of King Arthur's court, so might he
go out into the world today, into Central Asia or Africa, or even
into certain spots in this United States of ours, find himself
amidst social conditions very similar to those of 1300 years ago,
and even work his astonishing 19th century miracles with like
result. For it is a fact that, when Frank Hamilton Cushing
astounded the Zuni Indians with an acoustic telephone constructed
of two tomato cans and a string, they deemed him a magician, and
tried him for witchcraft. And, for parallels of the inhumanities
which, as we here read of them, seem to have been left far behind
us in the track of the centuries, we have but to look with George
Kennan into the dungeons of Siberia; and, in our own country, read
the records of the investigations into the horrors of the
almshouses, jails and lunatic hospitals here in this enlightened
commonwealth of Massachusetts so late as the time of Horace Mann,
or look to the record of the nameless barbarities of negro slavery
alive in the memories of men still young. How the conscience and
the sympathies of the world have quickened with the advent of the
railway, the steamship and the telegraph! We have, after all, but
just passed out across</p>

<center><b>The Threshold of the Dark Ages,</b></center>

<p>and, in view of the few steps we have taken, we can hardly doubt
that we are yet to make an infinitely mightier progress into the
light of a genuine civilization, putting far behind us the veneered
barbarism of the present, that still retains the old standards of
conduct and intercourse for our guidance in all "practical"
affairs.</p>

<p>As an instance of the scientific fidelity of this book in its
picture of mediaeval society, we may take this from the description
of the company at King Arthur's Round Table, around which there was
an average of about two dogs to one man, <a name="1">watching
for</a> bones:</p>

<center><a href="linkcy1.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
2]</a></center>

<p>The following also illustrates an exact perception of the
essentially savage traits of such a people: "Finally it occurred to
me all of a sudden that these animals didn't reason; that they
never put this and that together; that all their talk showed that
they didn't know a discrepancy when they saw it." Again, when Sir
Sagramour le Desirous caught a chance remark of the Yankee applied
to some one else and thought it meant for him, and so challenged
him to the memorable encounter that took place several years after,
and was fought with</p>

<center><b>Lariat Versus Lance,</b></center>

<p>the "Sir Boss," as he was called said: "Whenever one of those
people got a thing into his head, there was no getting it out
again. I knew that, so I saved my breath, and offered no
explanations." The foregoing characterizations might apply equally
well to a tribe of Dakota Indians, to their hardly more civilized
foes, the cowboys of the plains, to the mountaineers of Tennessee
and Georgia, or even to the savages in our great city slums.</p>

<p>By some strange means, perhaps more marvellous than those by
which Edward Bellamy transferred the hero of "Looking Backward"
forward to the year 2000, the Yankee is carried back 1300 years in
time, and in the record of his adventures affords us another and
very instructive sort of "Looking Backward." He is captured by one
of King Arthur's mailed knights, whom at first he takes for a
circus performer, and is carried to Camelot as a prisoner.
Condemned to be burned alive, according to the pleasa nt custom of
the age, he saves himself by threatening to blot out the sun unless
he is set free. He knew that a total eclipse was due as that date,
and, as it begins, the superstitious and credulous people at once
accept his claim to be a great magician, and King Arthur begs him
to let them off and name his own terms. He consents to spare the
sun, but just for a lesson he says he will let the darkness proceed
and spread night in the world, and exacts as his conditions that he
shall be appointed perpetua l prime minister and chief executive to
the King, simply taking for remuneration 1 per cent of such actual
increase of the revenue over and above the present amount as he may
succeed in creating for the state. He then proceeds to run the
kingdom accordin g to modern ideas; he introduces, step by step,
19th century inventions, his magic of modern science putting old
Merlin, with his "parlor magic," quite in the shade. One of the
most comical things in the book is the way in which Merlin, who is
horribly j ealous of his powerful rival, is made to serve as the
arch villain of the story. A bright boy, one of the pages at the
court, whom he calls "Clarence" for short, becomes the right hand
man of the Yankee in carrying out his plans, and is trained
according to the most approved modern ideas,</p>

<center><b>With Striking Results.</b></center>

<p>"What a jump I had made!" <a name="2">mused the</a> Yankee.</p>

<center><a href="linkcy5.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
8]</a></center>

<p>He describes the people as "the quaintest, and simplest, and
trustingest race" though "nothing but rabbits," and, to one born in
a wholesome free atmosphere, it was pitiful to listen to their
protestations of <a name="3">loyalty to royalty</a> and aris
tocracy.</p>

<center><a href="linkcy6.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
8]</a></center>

<br>
<center><b>They Were Having Tournaments</b></center>

<p>all the time at Camelot, "and very stirring and picturesque and
ricidulous human bull fights they were, too, but just a little
wearisome to a practical mind. Another popular diversion was going
for the <a name="4">Holy</a> Grail.</p>

<center><a href="linkcy7.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
9]</a></center>

<p>According to the custom of the age, the Yankee, too, goes off in
search of adventures, accompanied by the Demoiselle Alisande la
Carteloise, who brings in a tale of the usual pattern, all about an
ogre's enchanted castle, with captive maidens, etc. He has a most
ludicrous time getting into his armor, and starts off, with
"Sandy," as he calls her, riding behind him on the same horse. In
his armor he felt hot and uncomfortable, he perspired in rivers, he
itched and couldn't get at <a name="5">himself</a> to scratch.</p>

<center><a href="linkcy8.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
12]</a></center>

<p>Occasionally he encountered one of his own "missionaries" as he
called them, knights</p>

<center><b>In the Guise of "Sandwich Men,"</b></center>

<p>bearing such inscriptions as "Persimmons' soap -- all the <a
name="6">prime-donne</a> use it!"</p>

<center><a href="linkcy9.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
16]</a></center>

<p>The adventures encountered upon this expedition are ludicrous
and pathetic by turns; the wrongs and sufferings of the common
people under the degrading conditions of that age are described
with vivid and touching eloquence.</p>

<p>One day they came upon a group of poor, ragged creatures mending
the <a name="7">thing</a> they called a road:</p>

<center><a href="linkcy10.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
13]</a></center>

<p>At last they arrived at the Valley of Holiness, a famous
pilgrimage resort with great monasteries and convents, and hermits
galore. The monks were in sore distress, for the holy fountain had
ceased flowing, and Merlin's most powerful magic failed to r estore
it.</p>

<center><b>So the Yankee Took a Hand,</b></center>

<p>and told Merlin that the best thing for him to do was to go home
and work the weather. "It was a home shot, and it made him wince;
for he was the worst weather-failure in the kingdom. Whenever he
ordered up the danger signals along the coast there wa s a week's
dead calm, sure, and every time he prophesied fair weather it
rained brick-bats. But I kept him in the weather bureau right
along, to undermine his reputation."</p>

<p>He then worked a modern miracle on the well with stunning
effect, sending to the factory and chemical laboratory at Camelot,
which had been left in charge of Clarence, for the materials in the
shape of lead pipe, a force pump with an electric apparatus and
fireworks to give eclat to the proceedings. The account of this
miracle is one of the most delicious things in the book, repairing
the well with the aid of his trained assistants from Camelot by
mending the leak which nobody had thought of looking f or, and,
when everything was ready, repeating some phenomenally long German
words by way of conjuration, accompanied by Bengal lights from the
chapel roof, touched off with an electric battery, and finally
turning on the water to the accompaniment of a gr and outburst of
rockets -- all of which pyrotechnics was taken to be the vomiting
of hell-fire by the infernal spirit that had enchanted the
well.</p>

<p>While he was here at the Valley of Holiness, a rival magician
arrived and everybody took stock in him because he claimed to be
able to tell what the Emperor of the East and other mighty and
distant potentates were doing at any moment. But the Yankee n
on-plussed him by asking him to tell what he, the Yankee, was doing
with his right hand! But the humbug pretended that such trifles
were beneath his dignity; enchanters of his degree deigned not to
concern themselves with the doings of any but kings, emp erors,
princes, them that be born in the purple, and them only, and he
volunteered to tell what King Arthur was doing. But the Yankee had
secretly established telephonic communication with Camelot, and
knew just what was really going on at the court, and prophesied
that the King and Queen, with their following, would arrive in the
valley the day after the next, at vespers, to pay pious homage to
the waters that had been restored.</p>

<center><b>The Telephone Kept Him Informed</b></center>

<p>of the royal progress, but he was surprised that in the valley
there was no sign of interest in the King's coming; there seemed to
be no preparations making to receive <a name="8">him in</a>
state.</p>

<center><a href="linkcy11.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
24]</a></center>

<p>While the King is at the valley there is</p>

<center><b>A Competitive Examination</b></center>

<p>for positions in the new standing army just instituted, the
first regiment of which had just been formed. But the royal
preference is given to the young scions of the nobility over the
deserving cadets from the Yankee's recently instituted "West Point
." The latter, however, effects a happy compromise, by persuading
the King to make the 1st regiment the crack one, the "King's Own,"
officered entirely by the nobility, with possibly five times as
many officers as privates, so that it would be the heart' s desire
of the nobility, and leaving the rest of the standing army to be
made up out of common-place materials, and officered with nobodies,
as was proper -- "nobodies selected on the basis of mere
efficiency."</p>

<p>Another event is the arrival of the first newsboy with the
arrival of the new paper started under the management of Clarence,
the Camelot Weekly Hosannah and Literary Volcano, gotten up in the
regular Arkansas style. The following, from the department of
"Local Smoke and Cinders," is <a name="9">a sample</a> item:</p>

<center><a href="linkcy12.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
26]</a></center>

<p>When the Yankee mentions his intentions to go out to scour the
country disguised as a petty freeman and familiarize himself with
the humbler life of the people, King Arthur is all on fire in a
minute with the novelty of the thing, and insists on taking a
chance in the adventure. So the two start out incognito, and the
relation of their experience gives a wonderful chance to describe
the customs and manners of the country in that age. He has a hard
time</p>

<center><b>Breaking in the King</b></center>

<p>so as to assume the requisite humility in the presence of the
gentry whom they meet on the way. On one occasion the King forgot
himself. Two knights rode toward them, and it would have fared ill
in consequence of the King's lack of proper deference h ad it not
been for a dynamite bomb which the Yankee had taken along to work a
miracle with in case of emergency. With this he blew up the knights
most effectively, but he had to explain to the King that "this was
a miracle of so rare a sort that it could n't be done except when
the atmospheric conditions were just right. Otherwise he would be
encoring it every time we had a good subject, and that would be
inconvenient, because I hadn't any more bombs along."</p>

<p>Here is a capital saying by the King, when the Yankee is
drilling him to walk like a lowly man, which is difficult, since
his shoulders have known no ignobler burden than iron mail, and
they <a name="10">will not</a> stoop:</p>

<center><a href="linkcy13.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
28]</a></center>

<p>On this expedition the King is taught something of sympathy with
the common people by becoming familiar with their condition, though
it is a difficult lesson, that of bringing a man into touch with a
mode of life foreign to that in which he is born and reared. "He
could only see one side of it. He was born so, educated so; his
veins were full of ancestral blood that was rotten with this sort
of unconscious brutality." Finally, the Yankee and the King are</p>

<center><b>Made Captive and Sold as Slaves.</b></center>

<p>The slave market was utterly stagnant. The King of England
brought $7, and his prime minister $9. The King brooded; but not
about the prodigious nature of his fall; "what gravelled him most,
to start with, was not this, but <a name="11">the price</a> he had
fetched!"</p>

<center><a href="linkcy14.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
35]</a></center>

<p>They have some exciting adventures, and are on the point of
being hanged when they are rescued by the timely arrival of
Launcelot and 200 mailed and belted knights on bicycles; Clarence
rides along with them and tells how he has had the boys practising
this long time, privately, and just hungry for a chance to show
off.</p>

<center><b>England Then Takes a Great Start,</b></center>

<p>and the modern inventions are brought out openly. Even base ball
is brought forward with the intention of replacing the tournament
with something that might furnish an escape for the extra steam of
the chivalry. The account of a base ball match, with the knights
playing in their armor, is funny enough. "When a man was running,
and threw himself on his stomach to slide to his base, it was like
an ironclad coming into port."</p>

<p>The advance in the art of popular bookmaking in the past two
decades is illustrated by the contrast between <i>Innocents
Abroad</i> and this volume. In illustration, the progress is
particularly notable. Even a child of today would turn in contempt
from the crude woodcuts of the former to the beautiful pen-and-ink
drawings by Dan Beard that adorn the new work. These drawings are
graceful, picturesque and thoroughly characteristic of the spirit
of the book. Many of them embody instructive allegories, as, for
instance, in a cut of Justice, with her scales, one containing the
heavy hammer of "Labor" and the other the baubles of "Aristocracy,"
but the latter made to outweigh the former by means of the string
of "Self-interest," artfully attached to the toe of "Law," who
stands by; another, in a similar vein, shows the Justice of the
19th century and Justice of the sixth century standing opposite
each other, and simultaneously remarking, "Sister, your blind is
disarranged," for, with the same manner of string attached to the
toe of each, "Money" is made to outweigh "Labor" by the former,
just as titles are made heavier in the balance by the latter. One
little cut shows "Decorations of Sixth Century Aristocracy" as
"Rewards for all Babes Born Under Specified Conditions," such as
"Slave Driver," "Robber of Unarmed Savages," "Robber of Orphans,"
"Absorber of Taxes," "Murderer of Rivals," etc., the whole
supported by "Honi soit qui mal y pense!" Another illustrates the
remark of the king concerning a peasant: "Brother! to dirt like
this?" by depicting the three phases of oppression of man by man,
first by violence under the sword of royal power, then by the book
of "law," making man subject to the slave driver's lash, and last,
the subjection of the workingman to the millions of the monopolist.
A strong and spirited picture of an arrogant slave driver shows in
its face the unmistakable portrait of a celebrated American
billionaire and stock gambler.</p>

<p>We are so accustomed to regard England of today as "essentially
a republic, with a monarchical head," that it seems strange that
the utterances of this book, so thoroughly in accordance with
accepted American ideas, should find any difficulty in obtaining
publicity in England, yet so strong is the prejudice there still
that its English publisher has cut out some of the best passages,
including a portion of the preface, with some persiflage about "the
divine right of kings."</p>

<a href="cyrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="cyharper.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="cyboslw">
<head>
<title>Literary World Reviews Yankee</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword> 1890 American Eastern Unfavorable</keyword> -->
<h2>Boston <i>Literary World</i> [unsigned]<br>
 1890: February 15</h2>

<br>


<p>Mark Twain's latest book, which his publishers have brought out
in a handsome volume, seems to us the poorest of all his
productions thus far. The conceit of taking a Yankee of this
generation of telephones and the electric light back to King
Arthur's Court may please some minds, if presented in a story of
moderate length, but there can be few who will really enjoy it when
long-drawn out to the extent of nearly six hundred pages. Whatever
value Mr. Clemens might have incidentally imparted to his burlesque
by giving something like a correct picture of the customs of the
time in which the mythical King flourished is entirely absent. He
has crowded into his picture a great number of episodes
illustrating "ungentle laws and customs" which are historical,
indeed; but he says:</p>

<p><font size="-1">It is not pretended that these laws and customs
existed in England in the sixth century; no, it is only pretended
that, inasmuch as they existed in the English and other
civilizations of far later times, it is safe to consider that it is
no libel upon the sixth century to suppose them to have been in
practice in that day also. One is quite justified in inferring that
wherever one of these laws or customs was lacking in that remote
time, its place was competently filled by a worse one.</font></p>

<p>Mr. Clemens' method of writing history would justify him in
picturing the Connecticut of the seventeenth century as afflicted
with loose divorce customs and great corruption at the polls -- or
something worse -- simply because these are vices of the nineteenth
century! To crowd into a representation of one age the social evils
of all its successors known to us, and to omit those special
redeeming features of the time which made life tolerable, is a very
irrational proceeding.</p>

<p>The serious aim under Mark Twain's travesty is the glorification
of American Protestant democracy. The effort fails through the
extreme partiality of the procedure. Even a Mark Twain, the
persistent teacher of irreverence for great men and great events,
should have some little respect left for fair play. Mr. Clemens'
previous books have been bad enough in their strong encouragement
of one of the worst tendencies in a democratic State, the
inclination to sheer flippancy and unmanly irreverence in the face
of the natural sanctities of private life and the grand heroisms of
human history. But this volume goes much further in its endeavor to
belittle a century surrounded with romantic light by men of later
times, who thus fell back upon poetry as a slight relief to the
hard prose of their actual lot. A buffoon, like the hero of this
tale, playing his contemptible tricks where Sir Thomas Malory has
trod with a noble teaching of knightly courtesy, and uttering his
witless jokes where Tennyson has drawn so many a high moral of true
gentleness, is a sorry spectacle. It is not calculated to make a
reflecting person proud of a shallow and self-complacent generation
which can enjoy such so-called humor.</p>

<p>The one consolation to be derived from this melancholy product
of the American mind in the ninth decade of the nineteenth century
is that, equally in its serious and in its jesting parts, it must
bring about a healthy reaction in some of its admiring readers
because it overshoots the mark; because its history is perverse, in
its one-sided accumulation of evils; and because its humor will be
wearisome in the extreme when its falsity is seen.</p>

<p>When <a name="a">Mr. Clemens</a> relates his Life on the
Mississippi with characteristic American exaggeration, we cannot
fail to laugh and become friends. But when he prostitutes his
humorous gift to the base uses of historical injustice, democratic
bigotry, Protestant intolerance, and nineteenth-century vainglory,
we must express the very sincere animosity we feel at such a
performance. If anything could be less of a credit to our
literature than the matter of this book, it certainly is the
illustrations which disfigure it. A Protestant of the Protestants
himself, the writer of this review cannot refrain from thus freeing
his soul in the cause of literary decency when the Roman Catholic
Church, that is to say the Christian Church in one of the noblest
periods of its history, is thus grossly assailed by the writer and
the illustrator of this tiresome travesty.</p>

<a href="cyrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="cyplumas.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="cyharper">
<head>
<title>Howells Reviews Yankee</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1890 American Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<h2><i>Harper's Magazine</i>[William Dean Howells]<br>
 1890: January</h2>

<br>


<p>...Mr. Clemens, we call him, rather than Mark Twain, because we
feel that in this book our arch-humorist imparts more of his
personal quality than in anything else he has done. Here he is to
the full the humorist, as we know him; but he is very much more,
and his strong, indignant, often infuriate hate of injustice, and
his love of equality, burn hot through the manifold adventures and
experiences of the tale. What he thought about prescriptive right
and wrong, we had partly learned in <i>The Prince and the
Pauper</i>, and in <i>Huckleberry Finn</i>, but it is this last
book which gives his whole mind. The elastic scheme of the romance
allows it to play freely back and forward between the sixth century
and the nineteenth century; and often while it is working the
reader up to a blasting contempt of monarchy and aristocracy in
King Arthur's time, the dates are magically shifted under him, and
he is confronted with exactly the same principles in Queen
Victoria's time. The delicious satire, the marvellous wit, the
wild, free, fantastic humor are the colors of the tapestry, while
the texture is a humanity that lives in every fibre. At every
moment the scene amuses, but it is all the time an object-lesson in
democracy. It makes us glad of our republic and our epoch; but it
does not flatter us into a fond content with them; there are
passages in which we see that the noble of Arthur's day, who
battened on the blood and sweat of his bondmen, is one in essence
with the capitalist of Mr. Harrison's day who grows rich on the
labor of his underpaid wagemen. Our incomparable humorist, whose
sarcasm is so pitiless to the greedy and superstitious clerics of
Britain, is in fact of the same spirit and intention as those
bishops who, true to their office, wrote the other day from New
York to all their churches in the land:</p>

<br>
<p>It is a fallacy in social economics, as well as in Christian
thinking, to look upon the labor of men and women and children as a
commercial commodity, to be bought and sold as an inanimate and
irresponsible thing.... The heart and soul of a man cannot be
bought or hired in any market, and to act as if they were not
needed in the doing of the world's vast work is as unchristian as
it is unwise.</p>

<br>
<p>Mr. Clemens's glimpses of monastic life in Arthur's realm are
true enough; and if they are not the whole truth of the matter, one
may easily get it in some such book as Mr. Brace's <i>Gesta
Christi</i>, where the full light of history is thrown upon the
transformation of the world, if not the church, under the influence
of Christianity. In the mean time, if any one feels that the
justice done the churchmen of King Arthur's time is too much of one
kind, let him turn to that heart-breaking scene where the brave
monk stands with the mother and her babe on the scaffold, and
execrates the hideous law which puts her to death for stealing
enough to keep her from starving. It is one of many passages in the
story where our civilization of to-day sees itself mirrored in the
cruel barbarism of the past, the same in principle, and only
softened in custom. With shocks of consciousness, one recognizes in
such episodes that the laws are still made for the few against the
many, and that the preservation of things, not men, is still the
ideal of legislation. But we do not wish to leave the reader with
the notion that Mr. Clemens's work is otherwise than obliquely
serious. Upon the face of it you have a story no more openly
didactic than <i>Don Quixote</i>, which we found ourselves more
than once thinking of, as we read, though always with the sense of
the kindlier and truer heart of our time. Never once, we believe,
has Mark Twain been funny at the cost of the weak, the unfriended,
the helpless; and this is rather more than you can say of Cid Hamet
ben Engeli. But the two writers are of the same humorous largeness;
and when the Connecticut man rides out at dawn, in a suit of
Arthurian armor, and gradually heats up under the mounting sun in
what he calls that stove; and a fly gets between the bars of his
visor; and he cannot reach his handkerchief in his helmet to wipe
the sweat from his streaming face; and at last when he cannot bear
it any longer, and dismounts at the side of a brook, and makes the
distressed damsel who has been riding behind him take off his
helmet, and fill it with water, and pour gallon after gallon down
the collar of his wrought-iron cutaway, you have a situation of as
huge a grotesqueness as any that Cervantes conceived.</p>

<p>The distressed damsel is the Lady Corisande; he calls her Sandy,
and he is troubled in mind at riding about the country with her in
that way; for he is not only very doubtful that there is nothing in
the castle where she says there are certain princesses imprisoned
and persecuted by certain giants, but he feels that it is not quite
nice: he is engaged to a young lady in East Hartford, and he finds
Sandy a fearful bore at first, though in the end he loves and
marries her, finding that he hopelessly antedates the East Hartford
young lady by thirteen centuries. How he gets into King Arthur's
realm, the author concerns himself as little as any of us do with
the mechanism of our dreams. In fact the whole story has the
lawless operation of a dream; none of its prodigies are accounted
for: they take themselves for granted, and neither explain nor
justify themselves. Here he is, that Connecticut man, foreman of
one of the shops in Colt's pistol factory, and full to the throat
of the invention and the self-satisfaction of the nineteenth
century, at the court of the mythic Arthur. He is promptly
recognized as a being of extraordinary powers, and becomes the
king's right-hand man, with the title of The Boss; but as he has
apparently no lineage or blazon, he has no social standing, and the
meanest noble has precedence of him, just as would happen in
England to-day. The reader may faintly fancy the consequences
flowing from this situation, which he will find so vividly fancied
for him in the book; but they are simply irreportable. The scheme
confesses allegiance to nothing; the incidents, the facts follow as
they will. The Boss cannot rest from introducing the apparatus of
our time, and he tries to impart its spirit, with a thousand most
astonishing effects. He starts a daily paper in Camelot; he
torpedoes a holy well; he blows up a party of insolent knights with
a dynamite bomb; when he and the king disguise themselves as
peasants, in order to learn the real life of the people, and are
taken and sold for slaves, and then sent to the gallows for the
murder of their master, Launcelot arrives to their rescue with live
hundred knights on bicycles. It all ends with the Boss's
proclamation of the Republic after Arthur's death, and his
destruction of the whole chivalry of England by electricity.</p>

<p>We can give no proper notion of the measureless play of an
imagination which has a gigantic jollity in its feats, together
with the tenderest sympathy. There are incidents in this
wonder-book which wring the heart for what has been of cruelty and
wrong in the past, and leave it burning with shame and hate for the
conditions which are of like effect in the present. It is one of
its magical properties that the fantastic fable of Arthur's far-off
time is also too often the sad truth of ours; and the magician who
makes us feel in it that we have just begun to know his power,
teaches equality and fraternity in every phase of his
phantasmagory.</p>

<p>He leaves, to be sure, little of the romance of the olden time,
but no one is more alive to the simple, mostly tragic poetry of it;
and we do not remember any book which imparts so clear a sense of
what was truly heroic in it. With all his scorn of kingcraft, and
all his ireful contempt of caste, no one yet has been fairer to the
nobility of character which they cost so much too much to develop.
The mainly ridiculous Arthur of Mr. Clemens has his moments of
being as fine and high as the Arthur of Lord Tennyson; and the
keener light which shows his knights and ladies in their childlike
simplicity and their innocent coarseness throws all their best
qualities into relief. This book is in its last effect the most
matter-of-fact narrative, for it is always true to human nature,
the only truth possible, the only truth essential, to fiction. The
humor of the conception and of the performance is simply immense;
but more than ever Mr. Clemens's humor seems the sunny break of his
intense conviction. We must all recognize him here as first of
those who laugh, not merely because his fun is unrivalled, but
because there is a force of right feeling and clear thinking in it
that never got into fun before, except in <i>The Bigelow
Papers</i>. Throughout, the text in all its circumstance and
meaning is supplemented by the illustrations of an artist who has
entered into the wrath and the pathos as well as the fun of the
thing, and made them his own.</p>

<p>This kind of humor, the American kind, the kind employed in the
service of democracy, of humanity, began with us a long time ago;
in fact Franklin may be said to have torn it with the lightning
from the skies. Some time, some such critic as Mr. T. S. Perry (if
we ever have another such) will study its evolution in the century
of our literature and civilization; but no one need deny himself
meanwhile the pleasure we feel in Mr. Clemens's book as its highest
development.</p>

<a href="cyrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="cytruth.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="cylontel">
<head>
<title>Daily Telegraph Reviews Yankee</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1890 British Unfavorable</keyword> -->
<h2>London<i>Daily Telegraph</i> [unsigned]<br>
 1890: January 13</h2>

<br>
 At this holiday season, in books and newspapers, on stage and in
drawing-room, the poet and the painter, the author, the actor, and
the dramatist compete with one another to bring before young and
old scenes and suggestions of beauty, heroism, purity, and truth.
One writer is an exception. M<font size="-1">ARK</font> T<font
size="-1">WAIN</font> sets himself to show the seamy side of the
legendary Round Table of King A<font size="-1">RTHUR'S</font> time.
He depicts all the vices of feudalism -- the licentiousness of the
nobles, their arrogance and insolence to the middle classes, their
neglect of the poor, their hours of gluttony and idleness, varied
by raids and brawls and riotous disorders. He describes how a
Yankee visiting the Court uses modern inventions, defeats the best
warriors, and redresses the wrongs of the poor. It is quite
possible that a serious purpose underlies what otherwise seems a
vulgar travesty. We have every regard for M<font size=
"-1">ARK</font> T<font size="-1">WAIN</font> -- a writer who has
enriched English literature by admirable descriptions of boy life,
and who in <i>The Prince and the Pauper</i> has given a vivid
picture of medi&aelig;val times. A book, however, that tries to
deface our moral and literary currency by bruising and soiling the
image of King A<font size="-1">RTHUR</font>, as left to us by
legend and consecrated by poetry, is a very unworthy production of
the great humourist's pen. No doubt there is one element of wit --
incongruity -- in bringing a Yankee from Connecticut face to face
with feudal knights; but sharp contrast between vulgar facts and
antique ideas is not the only thing necessary for humour. If it
were, then a travelling Cockney putting a flaming tie round the
neck of the "Apollo Belvidere," or sticking a clay pipe between the
lips of the "Venus de Medici," would be a matter-of-fact M<font
size="-1">ARK</font> T<font size="-1">WAIN</font>, and as much
entitled to respect. Burlesque and travesty are satire brought down
to the meanest capacity, and they have their proper province when
pretentious falsehoods put on the masks of solemnity and truth.
Stilted tragedies, artificial melodramas, unnatural acting, are
properly held up to ridicule on the stage or in parodies. The
mannerisms of a popular writer like C<font size="-1">ARLYLE</font>,
B<font size="-1">ROWNING</font>, or even T<font size=
"-1">ENNYSON</font>, may, through caricature, be good-humouredly
exposed; but an attack on the ideals associated with King A<font
size="-1">RTHUR</font> is a coarse pandering to that passion for
irreverence which is at the basis of a great deal of Yankee wit. To
make a jest of facts, phrases, or words -- Scriptural, heroic, or
legendary -- that are held in awe or reverence by other men is the
open purpose of every witling on a Western print, who endeavours to
follow in the footsteps of A<font size="-1">RTEMUS</font> W<font
size="-1">ARD</font>, B<font size="-1">RET</font> H<font size=
"-1">ARTE</font>, and M<font size="-1">ARK</font> T<font size=
"-1">WAIN</font>. They may finally be successful enough to destroy
their own trade. They now live by shocking decent people who still
retain love for the Bible, H<font size="-1">OMER</font>, S<font
size="-1">HAKESPEARE</font>, S<font size="-1">COTT</font>, and
T<font size="-1">ENNYSON</font>; but when they have thoroughly
trained a rising generation to respect nothing their irreverence
will fall flat.

<p>The stories of King A<font size="-1">RTHUR</font> that have come
down to us represent in legendary form not any historical fact, but
an ideal of kingship and knighthood which had birth in the hearts
and aspirations of medi&aelig;val men. This was their ideal of what
a King amongst his warriors ought to be, and the beautiful image
has fired the thoughts and purified the imagination of millions of
men and women for many generations. Will this shrine in human souls
be destroyed because a Yankee scribe chooses to fling pellets of
mud upon the high altar? The instincts of the past and the genius
of T<font size="-1">ENNYSON</font> have consecrated for ever "the
goodliest fellowship of famous knights Whereof this world holds
record." The Round Table is dissolved, but we can still "delight
our souls with talk of knightly deeds," as they at Camelot in the
storied past. We can still apply the image of the ideal knight as a
criterion of modern worth. King A<font size="-1">RTHUR</font> swore
each of his followers to "reverence his conscience as his King, To
ride abroad redressing human wrongs, To speak no slander, no, nor
listen to it, To honour his own word as if his G<font size=
"-1">OD'S</font>, To lead sweet lives in purest chastity. To love
one maiden only, cleave to her, And worship her by years of noble
deeds." Such an oath presented to a modern Yankee would seem to
convey in almost every phrase a covert insult to American
institutions. In a land where commercial fraud and industrial
adulteration are fine arts we had better omit appeals to
"conscience." The United States are not likely to "ride abroad
redressing human wrong" -- as they never gave a dollar or a man to
help Greece, Poland, Hungary, or Italy in their struggles to be
free. "To speak no slander, no, nor listen to it," would utterly
uproot America's free press -- based to a great extent on
scandalous personalities. Loving one maiden only and cleaving to
her must seem too "high-toned" in the States, where there are many
facilities for ready divorce. So far M<font size="-1">ARK</font>
T<font size="-1">WAIN</font> is right as a Western iconoclast to
pelt with sarcasm ideals which are not included in the Constitution
or customs of the United States. Yet, in spite of all that America
has done or can do to deface images of self-sacrifice and beauty,
there are chosen souls in her own borders who have fulfilled the
heroic ideals of the olden time. The Abolitionists of New England
encountered great perils when they first set out to redress the
great human wrong of negro slavery, and they fought as noble a
contest against organised iniquity as any knight of A<font size=
"-1">RTHUR'S</font> Court. They faced political obloquy, mob
violence, loss of limb, sometimes of life, and the falling away of
friends and relatives, because they had inherited the old instinct
of knights, to lead lives of duty to their fellow-men. They were
jeered and derided by the M<font size="-1">ARK</font> T<font size=
"-1">WAINS</font> of the day, but their foresight was proved at the
end of the war, when the world recognised the two-fold result, "a
nation saved, a race delivered." What, too, would have been the
fate of the Republic if no ideal image of their country shone
before the souls of the men who died to save the Union? Coward
souls at the North said, "It will cost much money and many lives to
re-conquer the South: let them go; let the Republic break up; what
is a country to us?" but a chivalry that came down from British
ancestors animated the men who followed G<font size=
"-1">RANT</font>, and they kept to their high purpose until the
field was won. Where was M<font size="-1">ARK</font> T<font size=
"-1">WAIN</font> then? Why did he not satirise the patriotism that
would not let a Republic be mutilated? Why did he not sneer at
Yankee reverence for a paper Constitution not a hundred years old?
Why did he not sing the glories of trade as better than any
preservation of the Union or liberation of negro slaves?</p>

<p>Even if we look at the real feudalism idealised in the legends
of King A<font size="-1">RTHUR</font>, it was not all evil. No
doubt there were licentious nobles at all times, and there were
great landlords who were occasionally cruel to the peasants in
their fields. The change to modern times, however, is not all a
gain. A great lord of old held his possessions by "suit and
service"; he was bound to follow his King to the wars. Now he owns
his broad lands free of duty, and may live a life of shameful
luxury when he likes. The peasant of the olden times was not always
in distress. The country was thinly peopled; he had as much land as
he wanted; the woods were full of wild game, the streams of fish;
except on occasions of rare famine he was fed well. Such a thing as
an eviction was unknown, and for one good reason -- the lord was
not only bound to serve the King, but to bring men for his army;
consequently he had an interest in raising on his estates a body of
faithful followers. The modern landlord drives his peasants into
the towns, where, uncared for by him, they degenerate and die in
slums. We must remember, too, that the vices of the past were
characteristic of rough times; they were the sins of brutality, not
of fraud. A bad knight of the feudal age wronged a maid or widow,
and refused redress; but what are the offences of a commercial age?
In America and in England, to a lesser extent, financial swindling
is elaborately organised. The wicked man of modern times does not
couch his lance against the weak or lowly; he sends out a
prospectus. In twelve months the widow and orphan are breadless;
the promoter and the financier have added another twenty thousand
to their stores. Were King A<font size="-1">RTHUR</font> to descend
in New York to-morrow he would make for Wall-street, where he would
find a host of men whose word is as good, and as bad, as their bond
-- railway schemers who plunder the shareholders of a continent,
and are ever intent by every device of falsehood and of plot to
deceive each other and to defraud the public. Talk of the
inequality of man! King A<font size="-1">RTHUR</font> and the
meanest menial in his halls were nearer to each other in conditions
of life than the cramp in the slums of New York and the A<font
size="-1">STORS</font>, V<font size="-1">ANDERBILTS</font>, and
J<font size="-1">AY</font> G<font size="-1">OULDS</font> who have
piled up millions extracted from the pockets of less successful
men. The Republic is a 'land of liberty,' yet its commerce, its
railways, and is manufactures are in the hands of a few cliques of
almost irresponsible capitalists, who control tariffs, markets, and
politics in order that they may be enriched, to the disadvantage of
the masses. Which, then, is to be most admired -- the supremacy of
a knight or the success of a financier? Under which King will the
Americans serve -- the ideal or the real? Will they own allegiance
to King A<font size="-1">RTHUR</font> or J<font size="-1">AY</font>
G<font size="-1">OULD</font>?</p>

<a href="cyrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="cyscotso.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="cyplumas">
<head>
<title>Plumas National Reviews Yankee</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1890 American Western Favorable</keyword> -->
<h2><i>Plumas National</i> [unsigned]<br>
 1890: July 5</h2>

<br>


<p>Mark Twain has never written anything brighter and wittier than
<i>A Yankee in King Arthur's Court</i>, his latest book, which is
now issued with all the advantages of illustrations that add zest
to the great humorist's fun and satire. The book is as able and
original as <i>The Innocents Abroad</i> or <i>Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn</i>, while it bids fair to be fully as popular
with the American public as either of these books. It is one long
satire on modern England and Englishmen, under the clever guise of
an attempt to picture the England of the sixth century and of
Arthurian legend. It is said that Mark wrote the story about seven
years ago, but about the time he had completed it he paid a visit
to England and was received so handsomely that he didn't have the
heart to print his bitter satire, that in places reminds one of
Swift. Mark Twain has come up from the people. He is American to
the backbone, and the assumption of natural superiority by titled
English aristocrats and the terrible wrongs inflicted on the
working people, evidently galled him beyond endurance. He has taken
his revenge in this volume, and a thorough going over it is, for he
has mercilessly flayed the follies, vices, cruelties and false
pretensions of English royalty and aristocracy.</p>

<p>A mere statement of the plot of the story shows the ample field
it gives for "most excellent fooling." Mark pretends to find a
Connecticut Yankee in London who recalls his experiences in the age
of King Arthur. The story is told with great realistic effect, and
the extraordinary contrasts of modern slang and archaic speech, of
nineteenth-century progress and sixth-century superstition, when
developed by a master of the art of humor, are inexpressibly droll.
The Yankee is captured by one of the Knights of the Round Table and
brought to the court, where he is about to be executed as a curious
monster, when he chances to remember that an eclipse occurs on that
day. So he adopts the device which Rider Haggard has used with so
much effect in his African romances, and threatens to destroy the
sun unless he is released. The sun's disk begins to be obscured and
before the eclipse is ended he has been made a great noble, Sir
Boss, with ample revenue, and the office of chief adviser of the
King. Then begin contests with jealous knights and especially bouts
of witchcraft with Merlin, in which the famous magician is
completely vanquished by modern science.</p>

<p>Mark's picture of the deficiencies of the Arthurian court in
little conveniences is very droll. "No soap, no matches, no looking
glass, except a metal one about as powerful as a pail of water, and
not a chromo. I had been used to chromos for years and I saw now
that without my suspecting it a passion for art had got worked into
the fabric of my being and had become a part of me." And then the
makeshifts for light -- "a bronze dish half full of boarding-house
butter with a blazing rag floating in it was the thing that
produced what is regarded as a light."</p>

<p>And here is the picture of the people of England at the time of
King Arthur, which, curiously enough, is as applicable to the great
body of Englishmen of to-day as to those of <a name="3">thirteen
centuries</a> ago:</p>

<center><a href="linkcy3.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
8]</a></center>

<br>


<p>These extracts give a fair idea of the sarcasm which the author
heaps upon England. He is in dead earnest when he gets to tilting
at the divine right of kings and aristocrats to make the people
slave and sweat blood for them, but he unbends when he deals with
chivalry. He has no more reverence for the beautiful legends which
Tennyson has embalmed in his <i>Idyles of the King</i> than Bob
Ingersoll has for St. Peter's or the best works of some of the old
masters. Some of his caricature is very funny, as, for instance,
this bit about the <a name="4">search for</a> the Holy Grail:</p>

<center><a href="linkcy4.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
9]</a></center>

<br>


<p>In the last chapters the author puts no bridle on his
extravagance, and the book ends in scenes of warfare that will make
Haggard green with envy. The illustrations by Dan Beard are full of
humor, and bring out the fun of the story. The book is finely
printed and bound and lavishly illustrated. For sale by
subscription only by A. L. Bancroft &amp; Co., 132 Post Street,
sole agents for the coast.</p>

<center><a href="cyrevhp.html">Back to Yankee Reviews
Homepage</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="cyrevrev">
<head>
<title>Review of Reviews Reviews Yankee</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1890 British Mixed </keyword> -->
<h2><i>Review of Reviews</i> [William T. Stead]<br>
 1890: February</h2>

<br>


<p>In selecting as the Novel of the Month Mark Twain's new story,
<i>A Yankee at the Court of King Arthur</i>, I am aware that I
expose myself to many remonstrances. There is a certain profanation
in the subject, and withal a certain dulness in its treatment. It
is not a novel; it is a ponderous political pamphlet, and so forth
and so forth. Nevertheless, to those who endeavour to understand
what the mass of men who speak English are thinking, as opposed to
those who merely care about what they think they ought to be
thinking, this book of Mark Twain's is one of the most significant
of our time. It is notable for its faults quite as much as for its
virtues, and for the irreverent audacity of its original conception
as much as for the cumbrous and strenuous moralising which makes it
at times more like one of Jonathan Edwards' sermons than a mere
buoyant and farcical bubbling up of American humour.</p>

<p>Mark Twain is one of the few American authors whose writings are
popular throughout the English-speaking world. Our superfine
literary men of culture who pooh-pooh the rough rude vigour of the
American humorist represent a small clique. Mark Twain gets
"directlier at the heart" of the masses than any of the blue-china
set of nimminy-pimminy criticasters. In his own country, if we may
judge from the remarks in the January <i>Harper</i>, <i>A Yankee at
the Court of King Arthur</i> has been received with an enthusiasm
which it has hitherto failed to evoke on this side of the Atlantic.
We read there that</p>

<p>the delicious satire, the marvellous wit, the wild, free,
fantastic humour, are the colours of the tapestry, while the
texture is a humanity that lives in every fibre. We can give no
proper notion of the measureless play of an imagination which has a
gigantic jollity in its feats, together with the tenderest
sympathy. The humour of the conception and of the performance is
simply immense; but more than ever Mr. Clemens's humour seems the
sunny break of his intense conviction.</p>

<p>What a contrast this to the frigid condemnation of the <i>
Speaker</i>: "In his last book Mr. Clemens fails to make us laugh
by any method, even the worst. He is not only dull when he is
offensive, but perhaps even more dull when he is didactic." Yet I
make free to say that the vote of the mass of English people would
be on the side of the American and against the English critic. For
what our critical class has failed to appreciate is that the
Education Act has turned out and is turning out millions of readers
who are much more like the Americans in their tastes, their ideas,
and their sympathies than they are to the English of the cultured,
pampered, and privileged classes. The average English speaking man
is the product of the common school in America, of the public
elementary school in Britain and Australia. His literary taste is
not classical but popular. He prefers Longfellow to Browning, and
as a humorist he enjoys Mark Twain more than all the dainty wits
whose delicately flavoured quips and cranks delight the boudoir and
the drawing-room. This may be most deplorable from the point of
view of the supercilious &aelig;sthetes, but the fact in all its
brutality cannot be too frankly recognised.</p>

<p>Another circumstance which gives significance to the book is the
fact that it is the latest among the volumes whereby Americans are
revolutionising the old country. The two books which have given the
greatest impetus to the social-democratic movement in recent years
have both come to us from America. Henry George's land
nationalisation theories were scouted by the superfine, but they
have gained a firm hold of the public mind. His book has circulated
everywhere, and is still circulating. Of another kind, but
operating in the same direction, is Edward Bellamy's <i>Looking
Backwards</i>, which has supplied our people with a clearly
written-out apocalypse of the new heaven and the new earth that are
to come after the acceptance of the Evangel of Socialism. Mark
Twain's book is a third contribution in the same direction. His
Yankee is a fierce and furious propagandist of anti-monarchical and
aristocratic ideas. Under the veil of sarcasms levelled at King
Arthur we see a genial mockery of the British monarchy of to-day,
with its Royal grants and all its semi-feudal paraphernalia. Nor is
it only at British abuses Mark Twain levels his burly jests. He
thwacks the protectionist American as readily as the aristocratic
Briton. There is something infinitely significant in the very form
of his satire. If there is nothing sacred to a sapper, neither can
there be anything sacred to a descendant of the men of the <i>
Mayflower</i>, who has all the fervour of Mr.
Zeal-for-the-Lord-Busy and the confident, complacent assurance of
Sam Slick, who dismissed unceremoniously the authority of Plato or
Aristotle with the observation that we need not heed what they said
as there were no railways in their times. Here is the New England
Democrat and Puritan as passionately sympathetic with the common
man as the nobles and knights whom he scourges were sympathetic
with men of their order, determined to avenge the injustice of
centuries and by holding the mirror up to fact to punish the
chivalric age by showing how it treated the common man. It is not
longer enough to judge systems of to-day by the effect which they
have upon Hodge the ploughman and Bottom the weaver; the war must
be carried into the enemy's camp, the verdict of history must be
reversed, and all our ideals of the past transformed in the light
of this new and imperious interrogation -- The labouring man, what
did that age or that institution make of him?</p>

<p>Tennyson sang the idyls of the King, and as long as the world
lasts Sir Thomas Malory's marvellous old Romance will fill the
hearts and imaginations of men with some far-off reflection of the
splendours and the glories of that child-like age. But truly he
sang "the old order changeth, giving place to the new," of which
can we have a more notable and even brutal illustration than the
apparition of this vulgar Yankee realist, with his telephones and
his dynamite, his insufferable slang and his infinite self-conceit,
in the midst of King Arthur's Court applying to all the knighthood
of the Round Table the measure of his yard-stick, -- the welfare of
the common man? It is the supreme assertion of the law of numbers,
of the application of the patent arithmetical proposition that ten
is more than one, to the problems of politics and of history.
Tennyson himself, in the "Last Tournament," supplied a vivid
picture, which may well serve as a frontispiece of Mark Twain's
vision:</p>

<p>Into the hall swaggered, his visage ribbed<br>
From ear to ear with dog whip-weals, his nose<br>
Bridge-broken, one eye out and one hand off,<br>
And one with shattered fingers dangling, lame;<br>
A churl, to whom indignantly the king,<br>
"My churl, for whom Christ died; what evil beast<br>
Hath drawn his claws athwart thy face? or fiend,<br>
Man, was it who marr'd heaven's image in thee thus?"</p>

<p>The churl for whom Christ died is the centre of Mark Twain's
story, which is a long and a passionate attempt to suggest that the
evil beast who marred the visage of the poor wretch was the
three-headed chimera of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Church. There is
much strange misreading of history caused by the extent to which
Mark Twain has allowed the abuses of institutions to obscure their
use.</p>

<a href="cyrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="cyathena.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="cyscotso">
<head>
<title>Observer Reviews Yankee</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1890 British Unfavorable</keyword> -->
<h2><i>Scots Observer</i>[unsigned]<br>
 1890: January 18</h2>

<br>


<p>Mrs. Smedes' <i>A Southern Planter</i> and Mark Twain's new
lapse into Ibsenity and the cultus of the thesis, <i>A Yankee at
the Court of King Arthur</i>, appear about the same time, and both
are pretty sure to be widely read in Britain: the latter because
Mark Twain is currently believed to have been once a writer of
funny books, and the former because the Sage of Hawarden has
blessed it. He is not always happy, is the Sage of Hawarden, in his
selection of books to dignify with his <i>imprimatur</i>, having a
natural and peculiar leaning to religious fiction; but in
commending <i>A Southern Planter</i> to British readers he has done
well. Mrs. Smedes' book and Mark Twain's have at first sight little
enough in common but their transatlantic origin; but that view is
naught. Nothing could be further removed from the blatant frivolity
of the Yankee exwag -- "our arch-humourist," as Mr. de Howells
styles him in the current <i>Harper</i>, not without a hint of
unconscious pathos -- than the record of a noble life which Mrs.
Smedes has written with such simple piety; and had Mr. Clemens been
content to write about the court of King Arthur as he wrote about
Arkansas and the Mexican Plug no one would have mentioned the two
in the same breath.</p>

<p>For in those days Mr. Clemens lived to make the light-hearted
laugh; and his life was a success. But he has exhausted his vein,
and with faded cap and fools' bells jangled has got bewrayed with
seriousness and bedevilled with a purpose. He treats you to a
"lecture" in dispraise of monarchical institutions and religious
establishments as the roots of all evil, and in praise of Yankee
'cuteness and Wall Street chicanery as compared to the simple
fidelity and devotion of the knightly ideal. The key to this
precious piece of apostolics is contained in a frontispiece where
the Supreme Yank, the Connecticut man in a state of heroism, the
Bagman <i>in excelsis</i>, is pictured in the act of tickling the
nose of the British Lion with a switch. Now the life of Thomas
Dabney -- Virginian aristocrat and slave-owner-- is an effective
commentary on such violent vulgarity. He was full of just those
qualities which make the memory of King Arthur fragrant. The
mainspring of his life was not the almighty dollar but <i>noblesse
oblige</i>. Amid the prosperity of his plantation times, as amid
the havoc wrought on his and his country's fortunes by the war, his
supreme purpose was to fulfil the honourable ideal of a gentleman.
Such an ideal is no doubt inconsistent with the democratic notions
of the superior Yank; but it is not the least precious heritage in
the world's history for all that, and Mr. Clemens stamps himself
when he makes the bagman's mistake of bedaubing it with cheap wit.
It is the ideal which in English literature animated Sir Roger de
Coverley, and Mr. Allworthy, and Colonel Newcome, of whose virtues,
indeed, the life of Thomas Dabney was in many ways a realisation.
Mrs. Smedes has done her part of the work very well, except that
she might have cut down the correspondences with advantage. As for
Mark Twain, he has turned didactic, and being ignorant is also
misleading and offensive. His method, which was that of Hamibel
Chollop, consists in attributing every social, political, and
economic evil to the Crown and the Church. That slavery and
Protection have flourished under American republican institutions
does not hinder the ingenious creature from attributing their
existence to monarchy and what he calls the Established Roman
Catholic Church. To him that is decorous and just. But then he is a
bagman with a thesis, and his notions of justice and decorum are of
those that commend themselves to none but renegade Europians --
Europians of the stamp of Mr. Andrew Carnegie. To add to all this
that Mr. W. de Howells has taken occasion to contrast him and his
achievement in bagmanising with Cervantes and <i>Don Quixote</i>,
somewhat to the disadvantage of the latter, is to begin to pity the
poor devil. After all, he knows no better; after all, he is the
parent of Huck Finn and Jim the Nigger and the genuine Mexican Plug
and the incomparable Blue Jay. What should he do where Arthur first
in court began whose proper place is the Capitol, or Tammany Hall,
or the shadow of the Saint Louis Bridge? What should he do with a
thesis? What he really wants is a wooden nutmeg or a
razor-strop.</p>

<a href="cyrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="cyrevrev.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="cyspeakr">
<head>
<title>Speaker Reviews Yankee</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1890 British Unfavorable </keyword> -->
<h2><i>Speaker</i> [unsigned]<br>
 1890: January</h2>

<br>


<p>Mark Twain is also somewhat affected by the Spirit of his Time,
which is didactic; and by the Spirit of his Nation, which is
inventive, but not refined. Mr. Lewis Carroll is far beyond Mr.
Clemens in points of delicacy and taste; but it may be doubted
whether any English author of repute would have tried to win a
laugh by an irreverant treatment of the legend of the Holy Grail,
as Mr. Clemens has done in <i>A Yankee at the Court of King
Arthur</i>. It is quite certain that there are few English readers
who will care to see the subject begrimed with prime American
jests. Mr. Clemens used to be able to make us laugh without
resorting to this easy and distressing method; in his last book he
fails to make us laugh by any method, even the worst.</p>

<p>But Mr. Clemens is not only dull when he is offensive; he is
perhaps even more dull when he is didactic. His views on the
peerage, religious tolerance, republics, political economy, and the
application of electricity to warfare, may be -- some of them are
-- admirable. But they are out of place in a farcical book: the
satire is not fresh; the information is second-hand or inaccurate;
and the moral -- or immoral, as the case may be -- is clumsily
enforced and unduly prominent. Tediousness is still further ensured
by the length of the book. The joke is a long joke, and the author
has not "gompressed him." It would be idle to point out that the
book is not a sketch of the sixth century; because Mr. Clemens is
careful to remove by a prefatory note any such objection. But he
must not think that his confession of incompetence will make him
seem any the less incompetent to the intelligent reader.</p>

<p>The illustrations to the book are occasionally allegorical, and
remind us of the hieroglyphic which is to be found at the beginning
of prophetic almanacks. In one of them the root of a tree is marked
Religious Intolerence; but the artist spells quite as well as he
draws. They are very badly arranged; they seldom occur at the right
place; and they break into text, making the task of reading very
difficult. The task was hard enough, too, without that. We hope --
we may even believe -- that we have seen the artist at his worst;
we certainly have not seen the author at his best.</p>

<p>Sometimes we think that we shall never see the author at his
best again. American humour depended much upon quaint and happy
phrase. When these phrases are repeated <i>ad nauseam</i>, their
quaintness and happiness seem to disappear. But we have been
saddened and depressed by reading two long and humorous books, and
are, perhaps unduly inclined to be pessimistic. We had expected to
laugh a little; and, instead of that, we have learned much -- much
that we knew before. And, after all, it must be easy for Mr.
Clemens to do better; and we know why it must.</p>

<a href="cyrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="cylontel.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="cytruth">
<head>
<title>O'Brien Reviews Yankee</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1890 British Favorable </keyword> -->
<h2><i>Truth</i>[Desmond O'Brien]<br>
 1890: January 2</h2>

<br>


<p>My dear Mr. Wyndham, -- It has occurred to a good many prophets
since Lord Lytton wrote <i>The Coming Race</i>, --</p>

<p><font size="-1">To dip into the future, far as human eye could
see,<br>
Show the vision of the world, and all the wonders that would
be.</font></p>

<p>but it was reserved, I think, for Mark Twain to put on Hans
Andersen's Goloshes of Happiness and go back to the past, carrying
with him all the wonders of the present. <i>A Yankee at the Court
of King Arthur</i> is a bizarre book, full of all kinds of
laughable and delightful incongruities -- the most striking of its
incongruities, however, being unconscious, grim, and disenchanting.
For Mark Twain, as he goes on, gets into a fury so ferocious (and
natural) with the infernal oppression of the people by the Nobles,
the King, and the Church that he passes in a sentence from laughing
into raving at the "good old times"; and, like Macbeth at sight of
Banquo's ghost, he "displaces the mirth" of the feast he had
prepared for us. His fooling is admirable and his preaching is
admirable, but they are mutually destructive. In every page he
preaches pretty much what Richard Rumbold preached two centuries
since -- "I never could believe that Providence had sent a few men
into the world ready booted and spurred to ride, and millions ready
saddled and bridled to be ridden" -- but Rumbold preached it from
the most commanding of pulpits -- the scaffold -- whereas Mark
Twain preaches it from the sawdust of the circus and in the
intervals between a couple of jests or a couple of summersaults.
But it is thoroughly sound doctrine, and is needed still so sorely
in England and Ireland that it is ungracious to grumble at the mode
of its delivery. It will reach a larger audience, and, perhaps,
strike many of them more by its grotesque presentation than if the
preacher wore a less bizarre garb than motley.</p>

<p><font size="-1">Ridentem dicere verum<br>
 Quid vetat?</font></p>

<p>Still, such frightful episodes as that of the woman who was
burned to make a fire to warm a slave gang, or that of the hanging
of the young mother -- wife of the "pressed" man-o'-war's man --
with her baby at her breast (an incident, by the way, Mr. Mark
Twain, not of the sixth century, but of the beginning of the
nineteenth), freeze the laughter on our lips.</p>

<a href="cyrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="cyspeakr.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="harcour2">
<head>
<title>Courant Reviews Huck</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 American Eastern Favorable  </keyword> -->
<h2><i>The Hartford Courant</i>[unsigned]<br>
 1885: February 20</h2>

<br>


<p>In his latest story, <i>Huckleberry Finn</i> (Tom Sawyer's
Comrade), by Mark Twain, Mr. Clemens has made a very distinct
literary advance over Tom Sawyer, as an interpreter of human nature
and a contributor to our stock of original pictures of Americ an
life. Still adhering to his plan of narrating the adventures of
boys, with a primeval and Robin Hood freshness, he has broadened
his canvas and given us a picture of a people, of a geographical
region, of a life that is new in the world. The scene of h is
romance is the Mississippi river. Mr. Clemens has written of this
river before specifically, but he has not before presented it to
the imagination so distinctly nor so powerfully. Huck Finn's voyage
down the Mississippi with the run away nigger Jim, an d with
occasionally other companions, is an adventure fascinating in
itself as any of the classic outlaw stories, but in order that the
reader may know what the author has done for him, let him notice
the impression left on his mind of this lawless, myste rious,
wonderful Mississippi, when he has closed the book. But it is not
alone the river that is indelibly impressed upon the mind, the life
that went up and down it and went on along its banks are projected
with extraordinary power. Incidentally, and wit h a true artistic
instinct, the villages, the cabins, the people of this river become
startlingly real. The beauty of this is that it is apparently done
without effort. Huck floating down the river happens to see these
things and to encounter the people a nd the characters that made
the river famous forty years ago--that is all. They do not have the
air of being invented, but of being found. And the dialects of the
people, white and black--what a study are they; and yet nobody
talks for the sake of exhibit ing a dialect. It is not necessary to
believe the surprising adventures that Huck engages in, but no one
will have a moment's doubt of the reality of the country and the
people he meets.</p>

Another thing to be marked in the story is its dramatic power. Take
the story of the Southern Vendetta--a marvelous piece of work in a
purely literary point of view--and the episode of the duke and the
king, with its pictures of Mississippi communi ties, both of which
our readers probably saw in the <i>Century</i> magazine. They are
equaled in dramatic force by nothing recently in literature. We are
not in this notice telling the story or quoting from a book that
nearly everybody is sure to read, but it is proper to say that Mr.
Clemens strikes in a very amusing way certain psychological
problems. What, for instance, in the case of Huck , the son of the
town drunkard, perverted from the time of his birth, is conscience,
and how does it work? Most amusing is the struggle Huck has with
his conscience in regard to slavery. His conscience tells him, the
way it has been instructed, that to he lp the runaway, nigger Jim
to escape--to aid in stealing the property of Miss Watson, who has
never injured him, is an enormous offense that will no doubt carry
him to the bad place; but his affection for Jim finally induces him
to violate his conscience and risk eternal punishment in helping
Jim to escape. The whole study of Huck's moral nature is as serious
as it is amusing, his confusion of wrong as right and his abnormal
mendacity, traceable to his training from infancy, is a singular
contribution to the investigation of human nature. These
contradictions, however, do not interfere with the fun of the
story, which has all the comicality, all the odd way of looking at
life, all the whimsical turns of thought and expression that have
given the author his wide fame and made him <i>sui generis.</i> The
story is so interesting so full of life and dramatic force, that
the reader will be carried along irresistibly, and the time he
loses in laughing he will make up in diligence to hurry along and
find out how things come out. The book is a small quarto,
handsomely printed and bound, and illustrated by 174 drawings which
enter fully into the spirit of the book, and really help to set
forth the characters. (Published by Charles L. Webster &amp; Co.:
New York. Sold by subscrip tion only.) <a href="hucrevhp.html"><img
src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a> <a href="life1.html"><img
src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="hartcour">
<head>
<title>Warner Reviews Tom Sawyer</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1876 American Eastern Favorable </keyword>-->
<h2><i>Hartford Daily Courant</i> [Charles Dudley Warner]<br>
1876: December 27</h2>

<p>Mark Twain's <i>Adventures of Tom Sawyer</i> was published in
England last June, and immediately many of the most easily detached
and quotable portions of it found their way into the American
press, and a wide circulation. The COURANT printed at the time two
or three extracts from the book--Tom's adventure with the beetle in
church, a most delightful study as well as a piece of profound
philosophy, and the whitewashing of the fence, a bit of genuine fun
with an artistic finish that would give the author a deserved
reputation if he had never written anything else. The volume has
just been brought out here in a very handsome style, copiously
illustrated with drawings by Mr. J. W. Williams, who has happily
entered into the spirit of the book, and produced excellent and on
the whole the best set of character sketches we have ever seen from
his pencil. The engravings do not all do justice to the original
drawings, but they are more than fair, and as the text is
beautifully printed on broad pages, the whole effect is very
pleasing, and the volume is attractive at the first glance.</p>

<p><i>Tom Sawyer</i> is in some respects an advance on anything
that Mr. Clemens has before done--an advance we mean as a piece of
literary work, careful in finish, and thought out more maturely. It
has not the large, original force of the uncontrollable,
spontaneous humor that in "The Innocents Abroad" carried an
irrepressible burst of merriment round the globe, from San
Francisco to India by way of Europe, but it has passages as
exquisitely humorous as any in that book, and as a general thing it
is more finely wrought. The passages we have spoken of above amply
sustain this assertion; you can read them again and again with new
delight, and indeed, we find it difficult not to read them every
time we take up the book. They could not have been written without
the spark of genius. We find in this book, too, the author's style,
not more virile and sparklingly clear than formerly, but more
carefully finished; and the author has toned down a little those
excursions into the impossible, which are intensely amusing, but do
not commend themselves to the judgment on a second reading. And in
doing this he has lost nothing of his extraordinarily forceful use
of the English language. There is no one writing today who has a
finer intuitive sense of the right word in the right place.</p>

<p>The book is all about boys, and it is said to be written for
boys. It is a masterly reproduction of boy's life and feeling, but,
at the same time, it is written above boys: that is, the best part
of it--the wit, the humor, the genius of it will fly miles above
every boy's head in the country. The boys can appreciate the
adventure in it as a mere narrative, but not that which makes the
adventure valuable to older readers, who recall their own boyhood
in it. The boy has not the least sense of humor; that is nothing
funny to him in having his pocket in measure of useless trash; the
tricks he plays upon his comrades are not amusing to him; he is a
non-humorous, dead, in earnest creature, and it is this
characteristic that makes him amusing to us (to himself in
retrospect); but his serious life does not take in what we call
humor. It is for this reason that we say that Tom Sawyer will be
enjoyed most by mature readers, who will have a great delight in
seeing how faithfully boy life is recalled.</p>

<p>Boy nature is the same everywhere, and the characteristics here
given are of universal acceptance; but local coloring (as it is now
called) is different, and the boys of this book are of Missouri and
not of New England in a good many of their ways; and so they ought
to be, being studies from life. We should not counsel New England
boys to expect or to imitate some of the adventures in this book,
but they doubtless are true enough to the society they sketch. The
Missouri boy who has mighty stirrings in his soul and feels deeply
the desperate injustice of his tender home, may want to go away and
be a noble river pirate, just as the New England boy is sometimes
moved to run away to sea. But neither of them we fancy ever finds
or makes a pot of money by any sudden streak of luck.</p>

<p>We do not believe that Tom Sawyer or his comrades have the least
idea how bright a boy he is, or what exceedingly funny things he
says; he is as bright as Mark Twain himself. And probably no boy
will appreciate the deep fun and satire of the following passage.
In a midnight adventure of Tom and his companion, Huckleberry, the
boys think they are lost and fall into a panic. Huckleberry <a
name="7">whispers:--</a><br>
<br>
</p>

<center><a href="tomrevlink7.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
10]</a></center>

<br>
<p>The Sunday-school chapter, in which Tom's financial abilities
come out strong, and he trades himself into the possession of the
first prize, and in which he exhibits his Biblical knowledge, is
saturated with the keenest humor; but a boy will hardly comprehend
the fine observation and deep satirical humor of the scene. It is
prize day and company is present. On the platform is the great
Judge Thatcher, the county judge, and it is an important hour for
Mr. Walters, the superintendent, and for the whole school. It was
an impressive silence when Jeff Thatcher, the brother of the judge,
observed by "ranks of staring eyes," went forward to be familiar
with the great man and be envied by the <a name="8">
school:--</a><br>
<br>
</p>

<center><a href="tomrevlink8.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
4]</a></center>

<br>
<p>Tom is a genuine boy and his Aunt Polly is a genuine woman; both
are capitally drawn; and the author has given to both some noble
traits and elements of pathos which make them remain our friends
long after the laughter they excite has ceased. The book is full of
quotable things, scenes as amusing as anything Mr. Clemens has
written, with now and then a stroke of good humored satire that is
as well deserved as it is artistically administered--take the
school examination and exhibition as a specimen; the remarks on the
"compositions" of the young ladies might well be framed and hung up
in every school room. But it is unnecessary to quote from a book
which everybody will read.</p>

<a href="hompgrev.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="nytimes.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="harttime">
<head>
<title>Hartford Times Reviews Tom</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1876 American Eastern Favorable </keyword>-->
<h2><i>Hartford Daily Times</i> [unsigned]<br>
1876: December 20</h2>

<p>The American Publishing company of this city have just issued
Mark Twain's book, "Tom Sawyer." It is a beautiful book, both
outside and in, as one might naturally expect to find it on seeing
the imprint of this publishing house upon it--a house that has
established a well-earned reputation in the book publishing lines.
The illustrations in the book are of a merit beyond praise. They
are of the eloquent kind that speak for themselves, as well as for
the print they illustrate. Those who imagine this to be a tame
story for little boys will discover their mistake on reading it. It
is safe to predict that no one will read the first page without
reading all the rest. There is a power of attraction about it that
doesn't "let up," but grows stronger to the end. Though claiming to
be a book for boys and girls it will not be monopolized by them.
There's rich entertainment in it for both young and old. The author
says most of the adventures recorded in it really occurred, and
that one or two of them were his own. Perhaps his well-known
modesty forbids his claiming any larger proportion. The story dates
back some forty years ago, in one of the southwestern slave states.
The hero, Tom Sawyer, is a unique individual, to state it mildly.
The author says he belongs to the composite order of architecture.
Perhaps that is as good a description of him as can be given in
brief. He isn't one of the orthodox boys who love their Sunday
schools, and love to read about the good little boys who die early
and go to heaven. He evidently preferred the other place where they
don't have any Sunday schools, and the boys don't have to keep
quiet every seventh day in the week. He doesn't believe in early
deaths, nor early piety. Tom is a reckless, daredevil fellow, ready
to hazard life for an adventure any time; but under the rollicking
air of the book there appears an occasional bit of philosophy in
the peculiarly dry, sarcastic vein of the author, as this, for <a
name="3">instance</a>:<br>
<br>
</p>

<center><a href="tomrevlink3.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
2]</a></center>

<br>
<br>
Here's a hit at <a name="4">ministers</a>: <br>
<br>
<center><a href="tomrevlink4.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
5]</a></center>

<br>
<br>
The following, especially the account of the fly's toilet is
particularly <a name="5">good</a>: <br>
<br>
<center><a href="tomrevlink5.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
5]</a></center>

<br>
<br>
During the sermon that followed--a sermon that thinned the elect
down to a company so small as to be "hardly worth the saving"--Tom
had further interesting adventures which helped to give variety and
keep awake "other people uninterested in the sermon" as well as
himself.

<p>The account, some chapters further along, of the village school
graduating exercises, and the prize poems and compositions of the
young ladies, is racy and rich, but not in the least exaggerated.
Its beauty consists in its truth to life. The slim, melancholy
girl, with a cast of countenance "that comes of pills and
indigestion," who reads a poem as indigestible as her ordinary
diet, is to be found in any average school of the present day, as
can likewise be found her bilious companion who reads a composition
which "wound up with a sermon so destructive of all hope to
non-Presbyterians that it took the first prize."</p>

<p>Perhaps the most pointed paragraph in the book is the following
in relation to a petition for pardon for a <a name="6">
murderer</a>:<br>
<br>
</p>

<center><a href="tomrevlink6.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
33]</a></center>

<p>If there is any defect in the book it is in the love scenes,
where a boy of Tom Sawyer's size wanders off to be an outlaw. This
part is a little overdrawn. But the whole story is so exquisitely
told that the book will be widely sought. It is a capital gift for
the holidays.</p>

<a href="hompgrev.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="newhavmj.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="hfbufflo">
<head>
<title>Buffalo Reviews Twain-Cable</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1884 Lecture Twins Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Buffalo Times</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1884: December 11</center>

<br>
 <font size="+1"><b>MARK TWAIN AND CABLE--TWO DISTINGUISHED
LITERATEURS AT MUSIC HALL.</b><br>
A Large and Fashionable Audience Listen to the Readings of a
Humorist and a Novelist</font>

<p>[<i>Transcribed from Pond's <a href="tourad.jpg">broadside
poster</a>.</i>]</p>

<p>A very large and fashionable audience assembled in Concert Hall
last night to hear that prince of humor, Mark Twain (Samuel M.
Clemens), and that celebrated novelist, George W. Cable, in their
joint readings. They went expecting a treat and they got decidedly
more than they bargained for. A more delighted, amused, thoroughly
satisfied audience never filled the auditorium of any building in
Buffalo. Mark Twain, like old wine, or old friends, seems to
improve with age, and his dry, unconscious, apparently spontaneous
humor kept the audience in convulsions of laughter. With the
exception of his first reading, given in the program below, most of
the great humorist's admirers have heard or read the selections he
gave last night, but they are of the kind that never grow "stale,
flat or unprofitable" by repetition.</p>

<p>Mr. Cable's readings were not one whit less appreciated than
were Twain's. His style of rendition is different, of course; his
genius for description and natural intuition of the exact phases
and character of all men are wonderful, and when his own writings
are given with the exactitude and faithfulness he would have them,
his genius and power stand out, and one can easily perceive the
living images molded and shaped by his artist hands and master
brain. Those who have read Mr. Cable's novels of Southern life, and
have fancied they have struck the exact chord, even to the peculiar
Creole <i>patois</i> and Creole life, need to hear the man who
conceived the works to find that, no matter how careful may have
been their study, they are somewhat mistaken.</p>

<p>As the two distinguished men of letters came upon the stage a
volley of rattling applause greeted their ears. Bowing low, Mark
Twain introduced his friend and brother lecturer with a few remarks
that tickled the risibilities of the audience into immediate good
humor. "Allow me to introduce to you, ladies and gentlemen," said
Mark, "one whom I regard, the world regards, and you regard, as the
greatest modern writer of ancient fiction, and likewise the
greatest ancient writer of modern fiction the world has ever known.
One who has all the talent, all virtues and all vices blended
together to make the perfect man -- Mr. Geo. W. Cable," and Mark
bowed himself off the stage amidst prolonged laughter.</p>

<p>"I am very glad he mentioned my name at the last minute," said
Mr. Cable, "or you might have supposed it was the other man!" He
then gave with all the power of the consummate elocutionist and the
author a selection from Dr. Sevier. Presuming that Mr. Cable's life
among the people of Louisiana, and more particularly among the
Creoles, has given him a thorough acquaintance with their peculiar
life and dialect, his rendering of the conversation of Narcisse,
the Creole, was admirable and true. Mr. Cable makes a fine
appearance on the stage, has a very clear, musical voice, and never
fails for an instant to keep his audience absorbed in his word
painting processes; so absorbved that they too can see as he saw
with his genius when he brought them before life with his pen and
ink, his characters and the scenes surrounding them; see them arise
before their eyes and live and move and talk until he finishes his
recital.</p>

<p>When the applause had died away somewhat, Mr. Cable introduced
Mark Twain with a few felicitously chosen words. Said Mark (half
the humor is lost in the cold type): "I notice many changes in the
city in the last fourteen or fifteen years since I was here. I miss
many old friends. Some have gone to the tomb, some to the gallows,
and some to the White House. [Laughter.] Thus far, " he continued,
with a long-drawn sigh, "the rest are spared. Over us all, my
friends, hangs the same awful, uncertain fate; let us be secure
against error, and prepare for the worst. I remember a certain
circumstance of that by-gone time which I shall never forget. I
arrived here after dark one night in 1870, with my wife. We were
met by several friends, and I asked Mr. Slee to get us a cheap
boarding-house, because it's always a good thing to practise
economy. Then they drove us around through all the back streets of
Buffalo for about four hours. It seems that my friends kept up a
joke on me, and a real good joke it was, too. My father-in-law, Mr.
Jarvis Langdon, had clandestinely bought a house on Delaware Avenue
and furnished it up for us. It was a great secret -- so secret that
I guess every man this side of Niagara Falls knew about it, except
myself. They drove us up to the house, and when the door was opened
by the supposed landlady, and I saw the elegant furniture, my
opinion of Mr. Slee, and his ideas of a cheap boarding-house, went
way down to zero. I told Mrs. Thompson, or Mrs. Jenkins, or
whatever the landlady's name was, that we could only stay a week: I
had lots of talent, but not enough money to stay at such a palatial
residence. My friends, who had assembled there before I had
arrived, then explained the joke. Now," continued the speaker,
"that was really a fine joke; but those kind are all too scarce
nowadays. It was an admirable joke, admirably conceived, admirably
conveyed, and admirably carried out. The house doesn't belong to us
now, but the coachman we still have. He has been lavishly endowed
by fortune; why, that man has a wife and nine children!" He then
read a short chapter from the "Adventures of Huckelberry Finn,"
which was sufficient proof to show that in this, Mark Twain's
latest literary effort, his fund of humor has not yet left him.</p>

<p>In place of No. 5 on the programme, Mr. Cable gave a Creole
song, which was so admirable and beautiful that he was obliged to
answer the encore by giving another. Besides having proven himself
an author, elocutionist, and man of great genius, he proved himself
a splendid singer, with a soft, clear, beautiful voice. "Mary's
Night Ride" was grand. Mr. Cable painted with his author's brush
the thrilling incident of that ride through the Confederate lines,
as found in Dr. Sevier.</p>

<p>Mark Twain concluded with one of his ghost stories. He said it
was growing late, and he would have to tell a short one, and not
the one a morning paper (it was the <i>Times</i>, by the way) said
he would give about the North Street burying-ground. It is needless
to say it was told in his usual inimitable style.</p>

<p>Those who want a good laugh, and have a literary turn of mind,
should go to-night.</p>

<br>
<center>
<h1><i>The Buffalo Express</i></h1>
</center>

<center><b>1884: December 11</b></center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">"TWAIN" AND CABLE.</font></b><br>


<p>The audience that greeted "Mark Twain" and George W. Cable at
Concert Hall last evening was as fine a one as the most fastidious
could desire, and that it was appreciative the spontaneous applause
and constant bursts of laughter that greeted each alternate speaker
fully testified. When everybody was well seated the two made their
appearance together, and as Mr. Cable was down for the first
reading, it devolved on Mr. Clemens to introduce him, which he did
in his own peculiar style. He began in much the usual fashion, but
soon ran into an erratic eulogy of Mr. Cable, characterizing him as
one that "I regard, you regard, the world regards as the most
gifted ancient writer of modern fiction, the most gifted modern
writer of ancient fiction, in whom all talent, all viture, all vice
is blended to form the perfect man."</p>

<p>Mr. Cable's readings were from his latest novel, "Dr. Sevier,"
except in the third appearance when he varied the printed programme
by an African Creole song, which he rendered very finely. It was a
peculiar bit of plaintive minor music, and the light soft voice of
the novelist was well adapted to it. Responding to the encore he
sang a short bit representing the wail of a Creole mother for her
lost child.</p>

<p>"Mark Twain," as an old resident of Buffalo, felt it necessary
to renew former acquaintances. He scanned the audience from beneath
those heavy brows and said that he missed many faces that he knew
so well here fourteen or fifteen years ago. They had gone, gone to
the tomb, to the gallows -- or to the White House. All of us must
at last go to one or another of these destinations, and he advised
his audience to be wise and prepare for them all.</p>

<p>The lecturer closed this grave introduction of himself by
wishing his audience the same prosperity his coachman enjoyed and
then plunged into "Huck Finn," relating his original notions of
"King Sollermun" to Negro Jim.</p>

<p>Had a search been made for two men of letters more unlike in
appearance that "Twain" and Cable the result would have been a
total failure. The Southern novelist is the precise, alert, brisk
man of style, keenly alive dto his part in the entertainment, his
voice full of quavers and graceful turns of enunciation, his
rendering as dramatic as he could make it, which came near the
tragic in his rendering of "Mary's Night Ride." On the other hand,
"Mark Twain" is the man from way back who has sat down by the stove
at the corner grocery, gathered his cronies about him, and is
telling a story as only he can tell it. Grim, slow, solemn, not a
smile or an apparent attempt to dress up his lines, yet doubtless
as keenly alive to the effect as the other. The one is of the
dapper sort, as polite as a dancing master, and the other is
ponderous and heavy, who for an obeisance merely works his head to
a certain noticeable angle.</p>

<p>The two in this way form a splendid contrast and relieve each
other very acceptably. If the applause and amused smiles aroused by
Mr. Cable and the hearty laughter given in response to "Mark Twain"
humor measure the enjoyment of the audience, that enjoyment was
very great.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="hfdtroit">
<head>
<title>Free Press Reviews Twain-Cable</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1884 Lecture Twins Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center><i>The Detroit Free Press</i></center>

<center><b>1884: December 17</b></center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">THE TWAIN -- IN OTHER WORDS THE CLEMENS-CABLE
COMBINATION.</font></b><br>


<p>[Transcribed from Pond's <a href="tourad.jpg">broadside
poster</a>.]</p>

<p>The scene at the "front of the house" in Whitney's last night
was enough to make glad the heart of a manager. The sharp cries of
"one, two, one, three" of the head usher rang out as he turned the
well-dressed stream in ones and twos to the under-ushers. He stood
like a rock at the head of the centre aisle and the stream poured
in on him. It surged around him, but calm and immovable he stood,
and it broke around him. He utilized it and turned the steam into
rivulets that trickled down the different aisles like the separate
arms of the delta of the great river beside which the Twain authors
won their fame. The stream went in graceful cascades down the steps
of the different channels into the parquet and innundated it. The
theatre was a sea of faces.</p>

<p>The stage setting for this drama by two was of a nature
calculated to inspire the authors with wonder at the wealth and
splendor of Detroit interiors. Could Hartford insure a lovelier
blue satin parlor suite? Could New Orleans exhibit a more gorgeous
table-cover with a redder embroidered rose? The doors at the back
were twain, and the lace hung in cables over the middle
entrance.</p>

<p>A man, whose shadow was now and then projected against the
wings, snapped on the footlight gas. Then with a crack the overhead
illumination flooded the stage with light, and a third thrill
awaited the audience when the same invisible magician with the
lightning touch sprang the big chandelier into a dazzling
combination of jets. "It is like the President at Washington
starting the exhibition in the South to-day," said a lady to her
escort.</p>

<p>These little electric excitements led up the audience to the
event of the evening -- the entrance of the great American
novelist, the humorist leading slightly, as they say in sporting
circles. The sensation that had been caused by a brilliant-headed
stage boy coming in and moving one of the blue chairs up to the
footlights had subsided, and when the real actors came on there was
a grand burst of applause. Mark Twain, drifting round the table to
the front, leaving Cable kind of straddled on the other side,
drawled out:</p>

<p>"Lays sun gen'lmen, I introduce to you Mr. Caaa-ble."</p>

<p>And with a wave of his hand he left his partner before the
multidude, and retired R.E.</p>

<p>Mr. Cable looked down into the empty orchestra and saw on the
chairs where the fiddlers used to sit a motley array of overcoats
and sacques that showed him plainly that he was not in the balmy
climate of the sunny South. Then he lifted his face, and the
audience got a good, square look at him.</p>

<p>His make-up was good. The wrinkiles on his brows looked for all
the world as if he had been for years in constant surprise at his
own success. His whiskers were long and pointed, and they ran up
his cheek on either side until they met the smooth black hair. A
person had the uncomfortable feeling that perhaps they were held in
place by a string concealed over the top of his head, and that they
might at any moment drop off. His moustaches were of the St. John
(not the Evangelist, but the Prohibitionist) type, and their parted
ends drooped down to a level with his pointed beard -- three
peculiar points about Cable.</p>

<p>He seemed just a trifle like a nervous man who had got his
nervousness under pretty good control, but couldn't quite make up
his mind whether it was better to keep his hands clasped behind his
dress-coat, or in front of it with his thumbs up.</p>

<p>The first Cable dispatch was that exquisite conversation between
Narcisse and the Richlings, where the former tries to get John to
"baw" him some of the cash Dr. Sevier has placed to the credit of
the unfortunate couple.</p>

<p>"I wuz juz coming at yo' 'ouse, Mistoo Itchlin. Yesseh, I wuz
juz sitting in my 'oom afteh dinneh, envelop'in in my <i>'obe de
chambre</i>, when all at once I says to myself, 'Faw distwaction I
will go and see Mistoo Itchlin.'" It was distraction indeed to the
Richlings. He saw "Mistoo Itchlin" in every sense of the word, and
"baw'd" the last cent he had.</p>

<p>If Mr. Cable would come on the stage and sit down on the chair
and have a good actor do the talking there might be some
improvement. There was a touch here and there of amateurishness and
a certain self-consciousness that rather interfered with the
recital. Still, it is doubtful if any one could have given the
Creole dialect as well as Cable himself.</p>

<p>In retiring, amidst most enthusiastic applause, he took three
backward steps, made a bow, three more, then another bow, three
more, and out.</p>

<p>There was no burst of music between the acts. The overcoats and
things occupied the orchestra chairs with discretion and silence.
This, of course, gave Mark a great advantage. The people were in
good humor from the start.</p>

<p>"Mark the Perfect Man," saith the quotation. For "man" read
"humorist." Nothing could be more deliciously droll than his very
movement toward that embroidered tablecloth. He came in with his
head forward and looked like a man who had lost something on the
stage and wasn't exactly sure that he would be able to find it.
When he faced the music -- or rather the place where the music used
to be -- he looked at the audience with a puzzled, half-careworn
expression, as if he had met the people before, but couldn't just
at the moment recall their names. His half-closed eyes appeared to
peer out from under the bushy eyebrows with a puzzled gaze that had
been regarding life seriously for forty odd years, and couldn't
quite make it out. His bristly, plentiful hair was brushed back as
if he had been born that way. It looked as if it never could become
towsled up or come down over his eyes, and it was tinged with gray.
It seems incredible that Mark Twain should ever have gray hair, but
such are the indications.</p>

<p>His left hand automatically sought his trousers pocket, and slid
in there, leaving the thumb at liberty.</p>

<p>He told his stories with that inimitable Down East drawl of his,
and took his audience into his confidence with a serious
unconventionality that was most delightful. When he got through he
ambled off the stage with a little trot that was as funny as his
altogether diffident entrance. He reminds one in his serious fun
remotely of Raymond in "Mulberry Sellers." He also reminds you of
someone you have seen before, you can't tell who, but you are
friends with him, for old acquaintance sake, from the first. The
audience laughed so heartily at his stories that laughing became a
pain, and then, as Saxe says, "Cable like a poultice came, to heal
the blows of Twain."</p>

<p>The Creole songs that Cable sang in place of one of his
recitations were enthusiastically encored.</p>

<p>Mr. Cable should give up the funny business entirely to Twain.
He should stick to the serious parts of his book with the exception
of Narcisse, and let Mark bring the laughter. He is enough and
several to spare.</p>

<p>"Mary's Night Ride" was most graphically given by Mr. Cable. He
brought the picture vividly before the eyes of his audience and
held them spell-bound to the last word. It was the very perfection
of intense word-painting. Still he should have shot that navy six a
little quicker. The "once--twice--thrice" should have been given
with every spring of the flying horse. "The tart rejoinders of his
navy six" rang out in the night air, you may depend on it, Mr.
Cable, as quickly as the brave spy could pull the trigger, and by
the way, that sentence, "The tart rejoinders of his navy six," is
one of the most graphic ever penned by the hand of man.</p>

<p>Twain gave his version of the celebrated
st---st---st---st---whe-e-w-a--ammering story, which differs from
that of Col. Sellers, and is infinitely better than Raymond's way
of it.</p>

<p>In conclusion it may be said that while the stage settings had
somewhat of a sameness in them to a people educated up to the
scenery of the "Silver King" and such, still the combination must
save a good deal in baggage cars, and if we missed the background
of the Alps while Twain was in his "Trying Situation," or "The
Street in New Orleans" while Ristofalo was before us, we should
remember that our loss was their gain. Taking it from first to last
the Twain-Cable entertainment was by all odds the most enjoyable
thing of the season, a sweet boon to the tired theatre-goer and a
joy forever to the callous cynical man in the box office. When
shall we, Twain, meet again?</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="hfherald">
<head>
<title>Rochester Reviews Twain-Cable</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1884 Lecture Twins Eastern Favorable</keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Rochester Morning Herald</i></h2>
</center>

<center><b>1884: December 8</b></center>

<p>[<i>Transcribed from Pond's <a href="tourad.jpg">broadside
poster</a>.</i>]</p>

<p>The very unique and happy entertainment afforded by Mark Twain
and Mr. Cable in their joint recitations deserves the warmest
praise the press can give it. The former's manner and speech on the
platform, which are clearly unaffected, admirably supplement the
humor of his thought and language. His style is evidently an
expression of himself. The gravity of his features while reciting
his side-splitting productions, is equal to the apparent sincerity
and frankness with which he guyed that interviewer, and even
occasionally draws his audience into a trap and then inwardly
laughs at them. The most of his hearers Saturday afternoon and
evening endured all in the way of laughter to which it was safe for
Mr. Clemens to expose them. But they will be ready to take a second
dose whenever he can conventiently visit us again.</p>

<p>Whoever has read Mr. Cable's "Grandissimes" and his "Dr. Sevier"
was prepared to find in their author a man of talent and culture.
But we confess our own surprise over his remarkable powers as an
elocutionist. He has the delicate form, the small hands and feet,
the keen, intellectual features that excite remark from a stranger
in first seeing General Mahone, of Virginia. His voice, though
pitched on a high key, is sweet, musical, and flexible, and in his
recitiations he is equally happy in portraying the humorous and the
pathetic features of his works. His Creole songs are, to those who
have never heard them, a revelation of a new and delicious charm in
music. In gentle, genial humor nothing could well have been happier
than his representation of the courting scene between Ristofalo and
the delightful Irish widow in his Dr. Sevier, but for dramatic
fire, his rendering of the passage describing the encounter of Mrs.
Richling and her friend, the scout, with the Confederate pickets,
and the subsequent ride for life could not well be surpassed.</p>

<p>It is rare that authors are endowed as these gentlemen are, with
the power of interpreting their own creations to public gatherings.
We have no doubt that they enjoy it as much as their hearers do,
and they have the satisfaction of knowing that the entertainment,
in all its features, is solely due to their own genius.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="hucathen">
<head>
<title>Athenaeum Reviews Huck</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1884 British Favorable</keyword> -->
<h2><i>Athenaeum</i> [unsigned]<br>
1884: December 27</h2>

<br>
<p>For some time past Mr. Clemens has been carried away by the
ambition of seriousness and fine writing. In <i>Huckleberry
Finn</i> he returns to his right mind, and is again the Mark Twain
of old time. It is such a book as he, and he only, could have
written. It is meant for boys; but there are few men (we should
hope) who, once they take it up, will not delight in it. It forms a
companion or sequel, to <i>Tom Sawyer</i>. Huckleberry Finn, as
everybody knows, is one of Tom's closest friends; and the present
volume is a record of the adventures which befell him soon after
the event which made him a person of property and brought Tom
Sawyer's story to a becoming conclusion. They are of the most
surprising and delightful kind imaginable, and in the course of
them we fall in with a number of types of character of singular
freshness and novelty, besides being schooled in half a dozen
extraordinary dialects -- the Pike County dialect in all its forms,
the dialect of the Missouri negro, and 'the extremest form of the
backwoods South-Western dialect,' to wit. Huckleberry, it may be
noted, is stolen by his disreputable father, to escape from whom he
contrives an appearance of robbery and murder in the paternal hut,
goes off in a canoe, watches from afar the townsfolk hunting for
his dead body, and encounters a runaway negro -- Miss Watson's Jim
-- an old particular friend of Tom Sawyer and himself. With Jim he
goes south down the river, and is the hero of such scrapes and
experiences as make your mouth water (if you have ever been a boy)
to read of them. We do not purpose to tell a single one; it would
be unfair to author and reader alike. We shall content ourselves
with repeating that the book is Mark Twain at his best, and
remarking that Jim and Huckleberry are real creations, and the
worthy peers of the illustrious Tom Sawyer.</p>

<a href="hucrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="satrev.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="life1">
<head>
<title>Life Reviews Huck</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 American Eastern Unfavorable </keyword> -->
<h2><i>Life</i> [unsigned]<br>
1885: February 26</h2>

<br>


<p>Mark Twain is a humorist or nothing. He is well aware of the
fact himself, for he prefaces the "Adventures of Huckleberry Finn"
with a brief notice, warning persons in search of a moral, motive
or plot that they are liable to be prosecuted, banished or shot.
This is a nice little artifice to scare off the critics--a kind of
"trespassers on these grounds will be dealt with according to
law."</p>

<p>However, as there is no penalty attached, we organized a search
expedition for the humorous qualities of this book with the
following hilarious results:</p>

<p>A very refined and delicate piece of narration by Huck Finn,
describing his venerable and dilapidated "pap" as afflicted with
delirium tremens, rolling over and over, "kicking things every
which way," and "saying there are devils ahold of him." This
chapter is especially suited to amuse the children on long, rainy
afternoons.</p>

<p>An elevating and laughable description of how Huck killed a pig,
smeared its blood on an axe and mixed in a little of his own hair,
and then ran off, setting up a job on the old man and the
community, and leading them to believe him murdered. This little
joke can be repeated by any smart boy for the amusement of his fond
parents.</p>

<p>A graphic and romantic tale of a Southern family feud, which
resulted in an elopement and from six to eight choice corpses.</p>

<p>A polite version of the "Giascutus" story, in which a nude man,
striped with the colors of the rainbow, is exhibited as "The King's
Camelopard; or, The Royal Nonesuch." This is a chapter for lenten
parlor entertainments and church festivals.</p>

<p>A side-splitting account of a funeral, enlivened by a "sick
melodeun," a "long-legged undertaker," and rat episode in the
cellar.</p>

<a href="hucrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="bosttrav.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="londonex">
<head>
<title>Conway Reviews Tom Sawyer</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1876 British Favorable </keyword>-->
<h2>London <i>Examiner</i> [unsigned; Moncure D. Conway]<br>
 1876: June 17</h2>

<p>This newest work of Mark Twain increases the difficulty of
assigning that author a literary <i>habitat.</i> "American
humorist" has for some time been recognised as too vague a label to
attach to a writer whose "Jumping Frog" and other early sketches
have been reduced to mere fragments and ventures by such
productions as <i>The Innocents Abroad</i> and <i>The New Pilgrim's
Progress,</i> in which, while the humour is still fresh, there is
present an equal art in graphic description of natural scenery, and
a fine sense of what is genuinely impressive in the grandeurs of
the past. Those who have travelled with Mark Twain with some
curiosity to observe the effect of the ancient world interpreted by
a very shrewd eye, fresh from the newest outcome of civilisation,
may have expected to find antiquity turned into a solemn joke, but
they can hardly have failed to discover a fine discrimination
present at each step in the path of the "new pilgrim"; while he
sheds tears of a kind hardly relished by the superstitious or
sentimental over the supposed grave of his deceased parent Adam, he
can "listen deep" when any true theme from the buried world reaches
his ear. Without being pathetic he is sympathetic, and there is
also an innate refinement in his genius felt in every subject it
selects and in his treatment of it. <i>Tom Sawyer</i> carries us to
an altogether novel region, and along with these characteristics
displays a somewhat puzzling variety of abilities. There is
something almost stately in the simplicity with which he invites us
to turn our attention to the affairs of some boys and girls growing
up on the far frontiers of American civilisation. With the Eastern
Question upon us, and crowned heads arrayed on the political stage,
it may be with some surprise that we find our interest demanded in
sundry Western questions that are solving themselves through a <i>
dramatis personae</i> of humble folk whose complications occur in a
St. Petersburg situated on the Missouri river. Our manager, we feel
quite sure, would not for a moment allow us to consider that any
other St. Petersburg is of equal importance to that for which he
claims our attention. What is the deposition, death, or
enthronement of a Sultan compared with the tragical death of "Injun
Joe," the murderer, accidentally buried and entombed in the cavern
where his stolen treasures are hid? There he was <a name="a">
found.</a><br>
<br>
</p>

<center><a href="tomrevlink1.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
33]</a></center>

<br>
<br>
In such writing as this we seem to be reading some classic fable,
such as the Persian Sadi might point with his moral, "Set not your
heart on things that are transitory; the Tigris will run through
Bagdat after the race of Caliphs is extinct." Nor is this feeling
of the dignity of his subject absent when the author is describing
the most amusing incidents. Indeed, a great deal of Mark Twain's
humour consists in the serious -- or even at times severe -- style
in which he narrates his stories and portrays his scenes, as one
who feels that the universal laws are playing through the very
slightest of them. The following is a scene in which the principal
actors are a dog, a boy, and a beetle, the place being the <a name=
"b">chapel:</a> -- <br>
<br>
<center><a href="tomrevlink2.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
5]</a></center>

<br>
<br>
The scene we have selected is not so laughable, perhaps, as some
others in the volume, but it indicates very well the kind of art in
which Mark Twain is pre-eminent in our time. Every movement of boy,
beetle, and poodle, is described not merely with precision, but
with a subtle sense of meaning in every movement. Everything is
alive, and every face physiognomical. From a novel so replete with
good things, and one so full of significance, as it brings before
us what we can feel is the real spirit of home life in the far
West, there is no possibility of obtaining extracts which will
convey to the reader any idea of the purport of the book. The
scenes and characters cannot be really seen apart from their
grouping and environment. The book will no doubt be a great
favourite with boys, for whom it must in good part have been
intended; but next to boys we should say that it might be most
prized by philosophers and poets. The interior life, the everyday
experiences, of a small village on the confines of civilisation and
in the direction of its advance, may appear, antecedently, to
supply but thin material for a romance; but still it is at just
that same little pioneer point that humanity is growing with the
greatest freedom, and unfolding some of its unprescribed
tendencies. We can, indeed, hardly imagine a more felicitous task
for a man of genius to have accomplished than to have seized the
salient, picturesque, droll, and at the same time most significant
features of human life, as he has himself lived it and witnessed
it, in a region where it is continually modified in relation to new
circumstances. The chief fault of the story is its brevity, and it
will, we doubt not, be widely and thoroughly enjoyed by young and
old for its fun and its philosophy.  <a href="hompgrev.html"><img
src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a> <a href="lonnews.html"><img
src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="londonti">
<head>
<title>London Times Reviews Tom</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1876 British Favorable </keyword>-->
<h2>London <i>Times</i> [unsigned]<br>
1876: August 28</h2>

<p>Mark Twain belongs to a somewhat different school of writers
from Miss Yonge, and <i>Tom Sawyer</i> is a characteristic
production of his genius. We recognize the germ of it in the
stories of the good and bad little boys, which went some way
towards making their author's popularity. <i>Tom Sawyer,</i> as we
are told in the Preface, is intended primarily for the amusement of
children, but it is hoped that "it will not be shunned by men and
women on that account, for part of my plan has been to try
pleasantly to remind adults of what they once were themselves." How
far Master Sawyer's eccentric experiences may come home in that way
to American citizens we cannot pretend to say. To our English
notions, Tom appears to have been a portentous phenomenon, and his
eventful career exhibits an unprecedented precocity. His
conceptions were as romantic as their execution was audacious.
Holding all sedentary occupations in aversion, his cast of thought
was as original as his quaint felicity of picturesque expression.
We are very sure there are no such boys in this country, and even
in the States it may be supposed that the breed has been dying out,
for fully more than a generation has gone by since Tom was the
glory and plague of his native village on the Mississippi. His
remarkable talent for mischief would have made him an intolerable
thorn in the flesh of the aunt who acted as a mother to him had it
not been that his pranks and misconduct endeared him to that
much-enduring woman. "Cuteness" is scarcely the word for Tom's
ingrained artfulness. Take, by way of example, one of his earliest
achievements. He is caught by his aunt in some flagrant delict, and
condemned to whitewash the fence that runs in front of her cottage.
Tom had planned to make one of a swimming party, and, what is more,
he knows that he will be jeered by his playmates, and contempt is
intolerable to his soaring spirit. So, when he sees Ben Rogers,
whose satire he stands most in dread of, come puffing along the
road, personating a high-pressure steamer, Tom buckles himself to
his task with a will. He is so absorbed, in fact, in artistic
enthusiasm that Ben's ribald mockery falls on unheeding ears, and
Tom has actually to be twitched by the jacket before he turns to
recognize his friend. Ere long Ben, who was bound for the river, is
begging and praying to be permitted to have a turn with the brush.
Tom is slow to be persuaded; had it been the back fence it might
have been different, but his aunt is awful particular about this
front one --</p>

<p>"Ben, I'd like to, honest injun; but Aunt Polly -- well, Jim
wanted to do it, but she wouldn't let him. Sid wanted to do it, but
she wouldn't let Sid. Now, don't you see how I'm fixed? If you was
to tackle this fence and anything was to happen to it."</p>

<p>The result is that Tom, as an immense favour, trades the
privilege of a few minutes' painting for an apple. Each of the
other boys, as he comes up in Ben's wake, makes a similar deal on
his own account. Tom amasses a wealth of miscellaneous treasure,
which he subsequently barters for a sufficiency of tickets of merit
at the Sunday school to entitle him to walk off with the honours
for which meritorious children have been toiling; while his aunt,
to her intense surprise, finds her fence covered with several
coatings of whitewash, and goes into raptures over Tom's capacity
for work on the rare occasions when he chooses to apply himself.
But, though anything but a bookish boy, Tom had paid considerable
attention to literature of an eccentric kind, and, indeed, his
knowledge of men and things was very much taken from his favourite
authors. He runs away with a couple of comrades to follow the
calling of pirates on an island of the Mississippi, the grand
inducement being "that you don't have to get up mornings, and you
don't have to go to school and wash and all that blame
foolishness." After some days, when the trio are bored and
half-starved and rather frightened, Tom plans a melo-dramatic
return, and the missing ones emerge from the disused gallery of the
church and present themselves to the congregation of weeping
mourners, just as the clergyman's moving eloquence is dwelling on
the virtues of the dear departed. Afterwards Tom, who "all along
has been wanting to be a robber," but has never been able to find
the indispensable cave, stumbles on the very thing to suit him. So
he carries off a devoted follower who has been hardened for an
outlaw's life by the habit of living on scraps and sleeping in
empty hogsheads -- Republican freedom from class prejudices seems
to have been a marked feature among the boys of the Transatlantic
St. Petersburg. He teaches Huck his duties as they are flying from
the society of their kind out of the accumulated stores of his own
erudition. "Who'll we rob?" asks Huck. "Oh, most anybody -- waylay
people; that's mostly the way." "And kill them?" "No, not always.
Hide them in the cave till they can raise a ransom. You make them
raise all they can off o' their friends, and after you've kept them
a year, if it ain't raised, then you kill them. That's the general
way. Only you don't kill the women; you shut up the women, but you
don't kill them. They're always beautiful and rich and awfully
scared. You take their watches and things, but you always take off
your hat and talk polite. There ain't everybody as polite as
robbers; you'll see that in any book. Well, the women get to loving
you; and after they've been in the cave a week or two weeks they
stop crying, and after that you couldn't get them to leave. If you
drove them out they'd turn right round and come back. It's so in
all the books.' In the course of their researches in the cavern
they come on what Tom pronounces "an awful snug place for orgies."
"What's orgies?" inquires Huck. "I dunno," says Tom very frankly;
"but robbers always have orgies, and of course we've got to have
them too."</p>

<p>We fear these elegant extracts give but a faint idea of the
drollery in which the book abounds; for the fact is that the best
part of the fun lies in the ludicrous individuality of Tom himself,
with whom we have been gradually growing familiar. But we should
say that a perusal of <i>Tom Sawyer</i> is as fair a test as one
could suggest of anybody's appreciation of the humorous. The
drollery is often grotesque and extravagant, and there is at least
as much in the queer Americanizing of the language as in the ideas
it expresses. Practical people who pride themselves on strong
common sense will have no patience with such vulgar trifling. But
those who are alive to the pleasure of relaxing from serious
thought and grave occupation will catch themselves smiling over
every page and exploding outright over some of the choicer
passages.</p>

<a href="hompgrev.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="britqrev.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="lonnews">
<head>
<title>London News Reviews Tom</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<a href="hompgrev.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!--<keyword>1876 British Favorable</keyword>-->

<h2><i>Illustrated London News</i> [unsigned]<br>
1876: June 24</h2>

<p>"Mark Twain" has dropped the humorous exaggerations of his
"Jumping Frog" and "Innocents Abroad" in his fresh and racy story
of <i>Tom Sawyer</i> (Chatto and Windus). "Although," writes this
popular American humorist in his preface, "my book is intended
mainly for the entertainment of boys and girls, I hope it will not
be shunned by men and women on that account; for part of my plan
has been to try to write pleasantly, to remind adults of what they
once were themselves, and of how they felt and thought and talked,
and what queer enterprises they sometimes engaged in." So very
human is "Tom Sawyer" in its faithful delineation of boy-life that
it cannot fail to realize the hope of "Mark Twain," and amuse
everyone who in the words of the song, "would" he "were a boy
again." All the love of mischief, hopes and fears, joys and
sorrows, foolhardy pranks and acts of bravery that make Tom Sawyer
stand out as a veritable portrait from the life are set down by Mr.
Clemens with unfailing fidelity to nature; and that element of
adventure so dear to boys is supplied in a manner to satisfy the
appetite for the strangest sensational fare. It is the faithful
portrayal of boy-life, however--not the midnight murder in a
churchyard of which Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn are eye-witnesses, nor
the piratical venture of Tom and his mates, nor even the wanderings
of Tom and his sweetheart whilst lost in the cave--that makes "Mark
Twain's" last volume so welcome, and that will, doubtless, win for
him even a wider circle of readers that he has at present.</p>

<a href="hompgrev.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="athenaeu.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="mtlect67">
<head>
<title>NY Reviews MT</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<center>
<h1>New York Reviews</h1>
</center>

<!-- <keyword>1867 Lecture Savages Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->

<b>From the New York <i>Times</i>,<br>
May 7, 1867</b><br>
<br>
 A full and attentive audience assembled at the Cooper Institute
last evening to listen to the recital of Mark Twain's experiences
in the Sandwich Islands. Nearly every one present came prepared for
considerable provocation for enjoyable laughter, and from the
appearance of the mirthful faces leaving the hall at the conclusion
of the lecture, but few were disappointed, and it not too much to
say that seldom has so large an audience been so uniformly pleased
as the one that listened to Mark Twain's quaint remarks last
evening. The large hall of the Union was filled to its utmost
capacity by fully two thousand persons, which fact spoke well for
the brilliant reputation of the lecturer and his future success.
Mr. Twain's style is a quaint one, both in manner and method, and
throughout his discourse he managed to keep on the right side of
his audience and frequently convulsed it with hearty laughter. Some
of the anecdotes related were wittily told, and so embellished as
to be doubly enjoyed by his hearers. While the speaker made some
very amusing comments upon the habits and customs of the Sandwich
Islanders, he stated that all the facts related by him were
strictly true. The speaker gave the American missionaries great
credit for their work in civilizing and converting the Islanders,
and spoke of the singular fact that the descendants of these
missionaries have no stain upon their moral character, being
exemplary citizens.

<p>During his description of the topography of the Sandwich
Islands, the lecturer surprised his hearers by a graphic and
eloquent description of the irruption of the great volcano which
occurred in 1840, and his language was loudly applauded.</p>

<p>Judging from the success achieved by the lecturer last evening,
he should repeat the experiment at an early day.</p>

<hr width="55%">
<b>From the <i>New York Tribune</i><br>
May 11, 1867<br>
[Edward H. House]</b>
<center>
<h3>Mark Twain as a Lecturer</h3>
</center>

About a year and a half ago, a communication entitled "Joe Smiley
and his Jumping Frog," with the hitherto unknown signature of "Mark
Twain," appeared in <i>The Saturday Press</i> of this city. The
name, though new, was not remarkable, but the style of the letter
was so singularly fresh, original, and full of character as to
attract prompt and universal attention among the readers of light
humorous literature. Mark Twain was immediately entered as a
candidate for high position among writers of his class, and
passages from his first contribution to the metropolitan press
became proverbs in the mouths of his admirers. No reputation was
ever more rapidly won. The only doubt appeared to be whether he
could satisfactorily sustain it. Subsequent productions,
however--most of them reproduced from California
periodicals--confirmed the good opinion so suddenly vouchsafed him,
and abundantly vindicated the applause with which his first essay
had been received. In his case, as in that of many other American
humorous writers, it was only the first step that cost. Since that
time he has walked easily--let us hope not too easily--over his
special course.

<p>His writings being comparatively new to the public, and his
position having been so recently established, it might perhaps,
have been doubted whether his name would at present be sufficient
to attract an audience of any magnitude to witness his debut as a
lecturer. But the proof of the general good-will in which he is
already held was manifested last Monday evening by his brilliant
reception at the Cooper Institute. The hall was crowded beyond all
expectation. Not a seat was vacant, and all the aisles were filled
with attentive listeners. The chance offering of "The Jumping
Frog," carelessly cast, eighteen months ago, upon the Atlantic
waters, returned to him in the most agreeable form which a young
aspirant for popular fame could desire. The wind that was sowed
with probably very little calculation as to its effect upon its
future prospects, now enables him to reap quite a respectable
tempest of encouragement and cordiality. His greeting was such as
to inspire the utmost ease and confidence, and it is pleasant to
add that his performance in every way justified the favor bestowed
upon him. No other lecturer, of course excepting Artemus Ward, has
so thoroughly succeeded in exciting the mirthful curiosity, and
compelling the laughter of his hearers.</p>

<p>The subject of his address, "The Sandwich Islands," was treated
mainly from a comic stand-point, although scraps of practical
information and occasional picturesque descriptions of scenery and
natural phenomena peculiar to that region were liberally
interspersed. The scheme of the lecturer appeared to be to employ
the various facts he had gathered as bases upon which to build
fanciful illustrations of character, which were furthermore
embellished with a multitude of fantastic anecdotes and personal
reminiscences. The frequent incongruities of the
narration--evidently intentional--made it all the more diverting,
and the artifice of its partial incoherence was so cleverly
contrived as to intensify the amusement of the audience, while
leaving them for the most part in ignorance of the means employed.
As to the manner of the speaker, it is difficult to write
explicitly. It was certainly peculiar and original. Perhaps no
better idea of it could be conveyed than by saying it is in almost
every respect the exact opposite to that of the late Artemus Ward.
It suited that admirable lecturer's humor to exhibit a nervous
quickness and a vivacity which always communicated itself to those
who surrounded him, and his best "points" were made by the droll
affection of complete unconsciousness with which he uttered the
most telling jests. Mark Twain's delivery, on the other hand, is
deliberate and measured to the last degree. He lounges comfortably
around his platform, seldom referring to notes, and seeks to
establish a sort of button-hole relationship with his audience at
the earliest possible moment. He is even willing to exchange
confidences of the most literal nature. Having made an accidental
error in figures, last Monday evening, at which there was great
laughter, he paused and requested to be informed "what he had
said," and was indisposed to proceed until his curiosity should be
gratified. Instead of manifesting indifference to his own good
jokes, he appears to relish them as heartily as anybody--a
characteristic, by the bye, which also belongs to the most eminent
"reader" now known to the British public. The only obvious
preconcerted "effect" which he employs is a momentary hesitation or
break in his narration before touching the climax of an anecdote or
a witticism. But his style is his own, and needs to be seen to be
understood. A second opportunity for this, we learn, is presently
to be afforded, to which, when it approaches, we shall invite
particular attention.</p>

<p><a href="sandeast.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align=
"left"></a></p>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="nation">
<head>
<title>Nation Reviews Innocents</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1869 American Eastern Favorable</keyword>-->
<center>
<h2>The Nation [unsigned]<br>
1869: September 2</h2>
</center>

<p>Mr. Samuel L. Clemens, who is known to many of us, and ought to
be known to all of us, as Mark Twain, was one of the passengers on
the <i>Quaker City</i> when she took her ill-assorted party of
excursionists to Europe and the East, and he has just given us, in
a thick book of more than six hundred pages, a record of the tour.
It might better have been a thinner book, for there is some dead
wood in it, as there has to be in all books which are sold by
book-agents and are not to be bought in stores. The rural-district
reader likes to see that he has got his money's worth even more
than he likes wood-engravings. At least, such is the faith in
Hartford; and no man ever saw a book-agent with a small volume in
his hand.</p>

<p>But if some of the book is needless, none of it is really poor,
and much of it very good. Mr. Clemens's plan of delivering an
unvarnished tale, of giving just his own impressions of what he
saw, at once made his work sure of some real value as well as much
freshness, and his book is one to be commended merely as a book of
travels. But, of course, the "American humor" is the great thing.
It is not in the light of a traveller that one regards a gentleman
who when during his wanderings in the Holy Land he comes upon the
"tomb of Adam," which the monks exhibit, thus gives utterance to a
natural burst of <a name="1">sentiment:</a></p>

<center><a href="linkia1.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
53]</a></center>

<p>All the prominent characteristics of our peculiar school of
humorists -- their audacity, their extravagance and exaggeration --
Mr. Clemens displays in fulness in the course of his ramblings, and
he has some merits which belong to his individual self, and which
make him a very agreeable companion when he is at ease and natural
-- which is not always; for as he pads so, we must make free to
tell him, does he sometimes grimace, and is professionally a
humorist as he was professionally a book-maker. It will be a just
punishment for him to reflect that no doubt many a farmer will read
all his jokes -- the good ones as well as these bad ones we are
speaking to him about -- with profound gravity and unshaking belief
in them as so much serious log-book.</p>

<p>There is, besides those we have mentioned, another
characteristic of "American humor," which consists in a certain
sort of what may be called fatuousness. When the man in the
stage-coach, riding along with "the great moral showman" without
knowing him, kept on telling him, "some of Artemus Ward's jokes,"
and at the end of each one of them punched his companion in the
side and said, "What a damned fool the fellow is!" he was not the
worst critic that Artemus ever had. NearIy all his jokes have in
them a display of mental helplessness -- not to say imbecility -- a
drifting along of the mind from one topic to another, suggested but
not really connected, topic, and are largely dependent upon this
for their humorous effect. The same thing may be seen -- though not
nearly so unmixed nor so often -- in the efforts of Mr. Josh
Billings. The humor in the Nasby Papers consists rather in Mr.
Locke's conception of the low, "dough-face" Democrat than in
anything strictly humorous that is said or done by him after he is
made, and the Cross-roads pastor and postrmaster gives no
exhibition of the trait mentioned. But the author of <i>The
Innocents Abroad</i> has some of it -- though something of what he
has is acquired and imitative, we should say -- and may be taken to
be rather more nearly Artemus Ward's successor in this line than
either of the other humorists to whom we have referred.</p>

<a href="iarevhpg.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="packard.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="newhavmj">
<head>
<title>Morning Journal Reviews Tom</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1876 American Eastern Favorable </keyword>-->
<h2>New Haven <i>Morning Journal and Courier</i> [unsigned]<br>
1876: December 21</h2>

<p>We have already alluded to Mark Twain's new book, "The
Adventures of Tom Sawyer." The work has just been published, and is
a most capital subject for a holiday gift. Like all of its author's
works, it overflows with rare and quaint humor; and, in addition to
its attractive subject-matter, it has the advantage of being bound
very handsomely, printed on heavy tinted paper, and beautified with
150 illustrations, and is to be obtained at a far lower price than
Twain's other works. It contains about 300 pages. The lady agent
for this city may be found at 88 Court Street, where any subscriber
omitted by her may obtain the book.</p>

<a href="hompgrev.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="hartcour.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="nytimes">
<head>
<title>NY Times Reviews Tom Sawyer</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1877 American Eastern Mixed </keyword>-->
<h2>New York <i>Times</i> [unsigned]<br>
1877: January 13</h2>

<p>Shades of the venerable Mr. Day, of the instructive Mrs.
Barbauld, of the persuasive Miss Edgeworth! Had you the power of
sitting today beside the reviewer's desk, and were called upon to
pass judgment on the books written and printed for the boys and
girls of today, would you not have groaned and moaned over their
perusal? If such superlatively good children as Harry and Lucy
could have existed, or even such nondescript prigs as Sandford and
Merton had abnormal being, this other question presents itself to
our mind: "How would these precious children have enjoyed Mark
Twain's <i>Tom Sawyer</i>"? In all books written for the amusement
of children there are two distinct phases of appreciation. What the
parent thinks of the book is one thing; what the child thinks of it
is another. It is fortunate when both parent and child agree in
their conclusions. Such double appreciation may, in most instances,
simply be one in regard to the fitness of the book on the part of
the parent. A course of reading entirely devoted to juvenile works
must be to an adult a tax on time and patience. It is only once in
many years that such a charming book as <i>Little Alice in
Wonderland</i> is produced, which old and young could read with
thorough enjoyment. If, thirty years ago, <i>Tom Sawyer</i> had
been placed in a careful father's hands to read, the probabilities
would have been that he would have hesitated before giving the book
to his boy -- not that Mr. Clemens' book is exceptional in
character, or differs in the least, save in its cleverness, from a
host of similar books on like topics which are universally read by
children today. It is the judgment of the book-givers which has
undoubtedly undergone a change, while youthful minds, being free
from warp, twist, or dogma, have remained ever the same.</p>

<p>Returning then to these purely intellectual monstrosities,
mostly the pen-and-ink offspring of authors and authoresses who
never had any real flesh and blood creations of their own, there
can be no doubt that had Sandford or Merton ever for a single
moment dipped inside of <i>Tom Sawyer</i>'s pages, astronomy and
physics, with all the musty old farrago of Greek and Latin history,
would have been thrown to the dogs. Despite tasseled caps, starched
collars, and all the proprieties, these children would have laughed
uproariously over Tom Sawyer's "cat and the pain-killer," and
certain new ideas might have had birth in their brains. Perhaps had
these children actually lived in our times, Sandford might have
been a Western steam-boat captain, or Merton a fillibuster. <i>Tom
Sawyer</i> is likely to inculcate the idea that there are certain
lofty aspirations which Plutarch never ascribed to his more prosaic
heroes. Books for children in former bygone periods were mostly
constructed in one monotonous key. A child was supposed to be a
vessel which was to be constantly filled up. Facts and morals had
to be taken like bitter draughts or acrid pills. In order that they
should be absorbed like medicines it was perhaps a kindly thinker
who disguised these facts and morals. The real education swallowed
in those doses by the children we are inclined to think was in
small proportion to the quantity administered. Was it not good old
Peter Parley who in this country first broke loose from
conventional trammels, and made American children truly happy? We
have certainly gone far beyond Mr. Goodrich's manner. There has
come an amount of ugly realism into children's story-books, the
advantages of which we are very much in doubt about.</p>

<p>Now, it is perfectly true that many boys do not adopt
drawing-room manners. Perhaps it is better that little paragons
-- pocket Crichtons -- are so rare. Still, courage,
frankness, truthfulness, and self-reliance are to be inculcated in
our lads. Since association is everything, it is not desirable that
in real life we should familiarize our children with those of their
age who are lawless or dare-devils. Granting that the natural is
the true, and the true is the best, and that we may describe things
as they are for adult readers, it is proper that we should
discriminate a great deal more as to the choice of subjects in
books intended for children. Today a majority of the heroes in such
books have longings to be pirates, want to run away with vessels,
and millions of our American boys read and delight in such stories.
ln olden times the <i>Pirate's Own Book</i> with its death's-head
and crossbones on the back had no concealment about it. It is true,
edition after edition was sold. There it was. You saw it palpably.
There was no disguise about it. If a father or mother objected to
their child's reading the <i>Pirate's Own Book,</i> a pair of tongs
and a convenient fireplace ended the whole matter. Today the
trouble is: that there is a decidedly sanguinary tendency in
juvenile books. No matter how innocent, quiet, or tame may be the
title of a child's book, there is no guarantee that the volume your
curlyhcaded little boy may be devouring may not contain a series of
adventures recalling Capt. Kidd's horrors. In the short preface of
<i>Tom Sawyer</i> Mr. Clemens writes, "Although my book is intended
mainly for the entertainment of boys and girls, I hope it will not
be shunned by men and women on that account." We have before
expressed the idea that a truly clever child's book is one in which
both the man and the boy can find pleasure. No child's book can be
perfectly acceptable otherwise. Is <i>Tom Sawyer</i> amusing? It is
incomparably so. It is the story of a Western boy, born and bred on
the banks of one of the big rivers, and there is exactly that wild
village life which has schooled many a man to self-reliance and
energy. Mr. Clemens has a remarkable memory for those peculiarities
of American boy-talk which the grown man may have forgotten, but
which return to him not unpleasantly when once the proper key is
sounded. There is one scene of a quarrel, with a dialogue, between
Tom and a city boy which is perfect of its kind. Certain chapters
in Tom's life, where his love for the schoolgirls is told, make us
believe that for an urchin who had just lost his milk-teeth the
affections out West have an awakening even earlier than in Oriental
climes. In fact, Tom is a preternaturally precocious urchin. One
admirable character in the book, and touched with the hand of a
master, is that of Huckleberry Finn. Thcre is a reality about this
boy which is striking. An honest old aunt, who adores her
scapegrace nephew, is a homely picture worked with exceeding grace.
Mr. Clemens must have had just such a lovable old aunt. An ugly
murder in the book, overminutely described and too fully
illustrated, which Tom and Huck see, of course, in a graveyard,
leads, somehow or other, to the discovery of a cave, in which
treasures are concealed, and to which Tom and Huck fall heirs.
There is no cant about Mr. Clemens. A description of a
Sunday-school in <i>Tom Sawyer</i> is true to the letter. Matters
are not told as they are fancied to be, but as they actually
are.</p>

<p>If Mr. Clemens has been wanting in continuity in his longer
sketches, and that sustained inventive power necessary in
dovetailing incidents, Tom, as a story, though slightly disjointed,
has this defect less apparent. As a humorist, Mr. Clemens has a
great deal of fun in him, of the true American kind, which crops
out all over thc book. Mr. Clemens has an audience both here and in
England, and doubtless his friends across the water will re-echo
"the hearty laughs which the reading of <i>Tom Sawyer</i> will
cause on this side of the world." We are rather inclined to treat
books intended for boys and girls, written by men of accredited
talent and reputation, in a serious manner. Early impressions are
the lasting ones. It is exactly such a clever book as <i>Tom
Sawyer</i> which is sure to leave its stamp on younger minds. We
like, then, the true boyish fun of Tom and Huck, and have a foible
for the mischief these children engage in. We have not the least
objection that rough boys be the heroes of a story-book. Restless
spirits of energy only require judicious training in order to bring
them into proper use. In the books to be placed into children's
hands for purposes of recreation, we have a preference for those of
a milder type than <i>Tom Sawyer.</i> Excitements derived from
reading should be administered with a certain degree of
circumspection. A sprinkling of salt in mental food is both natural
and wholesome; any cravings for the contents of the castors, the
cayenne and the mustard, by children, should not be gratified. With
less, then, of Injun Joe and "revenge," and "slitting women's
ears," and the shadow of the gallows, which throws an unnecessarily
sinister tinge over the story, (if the book really is intended for
boys and girls) we should have liked <i>Tom Sawyer</i> better.</p>

<a href="hompgrev.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="altacal.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="overland">
<head>
<title>Harte Reviews Innocents</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1870 American Western Mixed</keyword>-->
<center>
<h2>Overland Monthly [unsigned; Bret Harte]<br>
1870: January</h2>
</center>

<p>Six hundred and fifty pages of open and declared fun -- very
strongly accented with wood-cuts at that -- might go far toward
frightening the fastidious reader. But the Hartford publishers, we
imagine, do not print for the fastidious reader, nor do traveling
book agents sell much to that rarely occurring man, who prefers to
find books rather than let them find <i>him. So</i> that, unless he
has already made "Mark Twain's" acquaintance through the press, he
will not probably meet him until, belated in the rural districts,
he takes from the parlor table of a country farm-house an
illustrated Bible, Greeley's <i>American Conflict,</i> Mr. Parton's
apocryphal <i>Biographies,</i> successively and listlessly, and so
comes at last upon "Mark Twain's" <i>Innocents</i> like a joyous
revelation -- an Indian spring in an alkaline literary desert. For
the book has that intrinsic worth of bigness and durability which
commends itself to the rural economist, who likes to get a material
return for his money. It is about the size of <i>The Family
Physician,</i> for which it will doubtless be often mistaken --
with great advantage to the patient. The entire six hundred and
fifty pages are devoted to an account of the "steamship <i>Quaker
City's</i> excursion to Europe and the Holy Land," with a
description of certain famous localities of which a great many six
hundred and fifty pages have been, at various times, written by
various tourists. Yet there is hardly a line of Mr. Clemens'
account that is not readable; and none the less, ccrtainly, from
the fact that he pokes fun at other tourists, and that the reader
becomes dimly conscious that Mr. Clemens' fellow-passengers would
have probably estopped this gentle satirist from going with them
could they have forecast his book. The very title <i>-- The
Innocents Abroad -- is</i> a suggestive hint of the lawlessness and
audacity in which the trip is treated. We shall not stop to
question the propriety of this feature: it is only just to Mr.
Clemens to say, that the best satirists have generally found their
quarry in thc circle in which they moved, and among their best
friends; but we contend that if he has, by this act, choked off and
prevented the enthusiastic chronicling of the voyage by any of his
fellow-passengers, who may have been sentimentally inclined, he is
entitled to the consideration of a suffering world; and it shall
stand in extenuation of some mannerism that is only slang, some
skepticism that lacks the cultivation which only makes skepticism
tolerable, and some sentiment that is only rhetoric. And so, with
an irreverence for his fellow-pilgrims which was equaled only by
his scorn for what they admired, this hilarious image-breaker
started upon his mission. The situation was felicitous, the
conditions perfect for the indulgence of an humor that seems to
have had very little moral or esthetic limitation. The whole affair
was a huge practical joke, of which not the least amusing feature
was the fact that "Mark Twain" had embarked in it. Before the <i>
Quaker</i> <i>City</i> reached Fayal, the first stopping-place, he
had worked himself into a grotesque rage at every thing and every
body. In this mock assumption of a righteous indignation, lies, we
think, the real power of the book, and the decided originality of
Mr. Clemens' humor. It enables him to say his most deliberately
funny things with all the haste and exaggeration of rage; it gives
him an opportunity to invent such epithets as "animated outrage,"
and "spider-legged gorilla," and apply them, with no sense of
personal responsibility on the part of reader or writer. And the
rage is always ludicrously disproportionate to the cause. It is
"Mr. Boythorn," without his politeness, or his cheerful intervals.
For, when "Mark Twain" is not simulating indignation, he is <i>
really</i> sentimental. He shows it in fine writing -- in really
admirable rhetoric, vigorous and picturesque -- but too apt, at
times, to suggest the lecturing attitude, or the reporter's
flourish. Yet it is so much better than what one had any right to
expect, and is such an agreeable relief to long passages of
extravagant humor, that the reader is very apt to overlook the real
fact, that it is often quite as extravagant. Yet, with all his
independence, "Mark Twain" seems to have followed his guide and
guidebooks with a simple, unconscious fidelity. He was quite
content to see only that which every body else sees, even if he was
not content to see it with the same eyes. His record contains no
new facts or features of the countries visited. He has always his
own criticism, his own comments, his own protests, but always
concerning the same old facts. Either from lack of time or desire,
he never stepped out of the tread-mill round of "sights." His
remarks might have been penciled on the margins of Murray. This is
undoubtedly a good way to correct the enthusiasm or misstatements
of other tourists; but is, perhaps, hardly the best method of
getting at the truth for one's self. As a conscientious,
painstaking traveler, "Mark Twain," we fear, is not to be
commended. But that his book would have been as amusing, if he had
been, is a matter of doubt. Most of the criticism is just in
spirit, although extravagant, and often too positive in style. But
it should be remembered that the style itself is a professional
exaggeration, and that the irascible pilgrim, "Mark Twain," is a
very eccentric creation of Mr. Clemens'. We can, perhaps, no more
fairly hold Mr. Clemens responsible for "Mark Twain's" irreverence
than we could have held the late Mr. Charles F. Browne to account
for "Artemus Ward's" meanness and humbuggery. There may be a
question of taste in Mr. Clemens permitting such a man as "Mark
Twain" to go to the Holy Land at all; but we contend that such a
traveler would be more likely to report its external aspect
truthfully than a man of larger reverence. And are there not
Lamartines, Primes, and unnumbered sentimental and pious pilgrims
to offset these losel skeptics -- or, as our author would say, such
"animated outrages" -- as Ross Browne, Swift, "Mark Twain," <i>et
al</i>.</p>

<p>To subject Mr. Clemens to any of those delicate tests by which
we are supposed to detect the true humorist, might not be either
fair or convincing. He has caught, with great appreciation and
skill, that ungathered humor and extravagance which belong to
pioneer communities -- which have been current in bar-rooms, on
railways, and in stages -- and which sometimes get crudely into
literature, as "a fellow out West says." A good deal of this is
that picturesque Western talk which we call "slang," in default of
a better term for inchoate epigram. His characters speak naturally,
and in their own tongue. If he has not it that balance of pathos
which we deem essential to complete humor, he has something very
like it in that serious eloquence to which we have before alluded.
Like all materialists, he is an honest hater of all cant -- except,
of course, the cant of materialism -- which, it is presumed, is
perfectly right and proper. To conclude: after a perusal of this
volume, we see no reason for withholding the opinion we entertained
before taking it up, that Mr. Clemens deserves to rank foremost
among Western humorists; and, in California, above his only rival,
"John Phoenix," whose fun, though more cultivated and spontaneous,
lacked the sincere purpose and larger intent of "Mark Twain's."</p>

<a href="iarevhpg.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="athenae.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="packard">
<head>
<title>Packard's Reviews Innocents</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1869 American Eastern Favorable </keyword>-->
<center>
<h2>Packard's Monthly [unsigned]<br>
1869: October</h2>
</center>

<p><i>The Innocents Abroad; or, The New Pilgrim's Progress,</i> is
the title of Mark Twain's latest appearance between covers. The
book is a ponderous one, containing over 650 pages, splendidly
illustrated, and produced in the best style of art by the American
Publishing Company, of Hartford. No ordinary "notice" can do
justice to this work. In the language of many others, "it must be
seen (and read) to be appreciated." It is a curious account of the
famous Quaker City pleasure trip to the Mediterranean and the Holy
Land, which was conceived by and executed under command of Captain
Duncan, in the summer of 1867. There were many intelligent
sight-seers among "the innocents"; but few, we are inclined to
believe, who got as much out of the trip as did the author of this
book. Mark Twain is a born journalist, besides being at the present
time first among American humorists. It is, indeed, doubtful if he
has ever had an equal; he certainly has not had in his line -- that
of dry, self-contained, unobtrusive and pervading fun. There is no
glare in his emanations -- no blinding coruscations of wit, which,
flashing suddenly upon you, as suddenly go out, leaving you in
darkness and uncertainty; no apparent striving after sharp effects;
no digging in poor soil for poorer puns. What is said is most
naturally said, and if there is humor in it, it is because the
writer could not express it otherwise. Whatever may be the quality
of the wine which fills your glass, you never feel that it is being
drawn from an empty cask, or that its flavor is at all dependent
upon the abundance of its supply. When Mr. Beecher was reprimanded
for saying so many funny things in the pulpit, he replied, "Oh, but
if you only knew the number of funny things I do not say!" And this
is the impression left upon the reader of Mark Twain. Whatever good
things he may choose to fasten with his pen, one cannot but feel
that his best things are yet untold. There is one species of poor
wit that Mark has not yet found it necessary to attempt, and we
trust he never will, and that is poor orthography and worse
grammar. It is not to be denied that a telling point may sometimes
be made by a violent assault upon the barriers of "good English."
Artemus Ward achieved some glory in this field; and his literary
successor, Josh Billings, sometimes unearths a nugget; but the game
thus far has not been worth the candle, and we doubt if it ever
will be. At all events, Mark Twain has no such weak necessity, and
we are glad of it. Some portions of the book are devoted to
correct, unexaggerated descriptions of the country, and matters
requiring historical accuracy; but there is no pretence, other than
of a humorous and extravagant account of a memorable voyage. There
will be those who will see in the descriptions of the Holy Land a
conspicuous lack of reverence for sacred associations, and the
contrast between this and ordinary guide-books will not need to be
pointed out; but the artistic and effectual disposal of the
romantic tales of tourists, which have enveloped these scenes with
a mysterious beauty and awe not to be penetrated or approached,
will be at least satisfactory to the matter-of-fact reader.</p>

<p>Here is his quiet style of getting down from a high state of
mental exhilaration to every-day considerations:</p>

<center><a href="linkia2.html">[EXCERPT FROM CHAPTER
47]</a></center>

<a href="iarevhpg.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="blurbs.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="perry">
<head>
<title>Century Reviews Huck</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">

<!-- <keyword>1885 American Eastern Mixed </keyword> -->

<h2><i>The Century Illustrated Monthly Magazine</i>, T. S.
Perry<br>
1885: May</h2>

<br>


<center>
<table border="0" width="650" cellpadding="5">
<tr>
<td>
<center><img src="../margin.GIF"></center>
</td>
<td>
<p>MARK TWAIN'S "Tom Sawyer" is an interesting record of boyish
adventure; but, amusing as it is, it may yet be fair to ask whether
its most marked fault is not too strong adherence to conventional
literary models? A glance at the book certainly does not confirm
this opinion, but those who recall the precocious affection of Tom
Sawyer, at the age when he is losing his first teeth, for a little
girl whom he has seen once or twice, will confess that the modern
novel exercises a very great influence. What is best in the book,
what one remembers, is the light we get into the boy's heart. The
romantic devotion to the little girl, the terrible adventures with
murderers and in huge caves, have the air of concessions to jaded
readers. But when Tom gives the cat Pain-Killer, is restless in
church, and is recklessly and eternally deceiving his aunt, we are
on firm ground--the author is doing sincere work.</p>

<p>This later book, "Huckleberry Finn," has the great advantage of
being written in autobiographical form. This secures a unity in the
narration that is most valuable; every scene is given, not
described; and the result is a vivid picture of Western life forty
or fifty years ago. While "Tom Sawyer" is scarcely more than an
apparently fortuitous collection of incidents, and its thread is
one that has to do with murders, this story has a more intelligible
plot. Huckleberry, its immortal hero, runs away from his worthless
father, and floats down the Mississippi on a raft, in company with
Jim, a runaway negro. This plot gives great opportunity for varying
incidents. The travelers spend some time on an island; they outwit
every one they meet; they acquire full knowledge of the hideous
fringe of civilization that then adorned that valley; and the book
is a most valuable record of an important part of our motley
American civilization.</p>

<p>What makes it valuable is the evident truthfulness of the
narrative, and where this is lacking and its place is taken by
ingenious invention, the book suffers. What is inimitable, however,
is the reflection of the whole varied series of adventures in the
mind of the young scapegrace of a hero. His undying fertility of
invention, his courage, his manliness in every trial, are an
incarnation of the better side of the ruffianism that is one result
of the independence of Americans, just as hypocrisy is one result
of the English respect for civilization. The total absence of
morbidness in the book--for the <i>mal du siecle</i> has not yet
reached Arkansas--gives it a genuine charm; and it is interesting
to notice the art with which this is brought out. The best instance
is perhaps to be found in the account of the feud between the
Shepherdsons and the Grangerfords, which is described only as it
would appear to a semi-civilized boy of fourteen, without the
slightest condemnation or surprise,--either of which would be bad
art,--and yet nothing more vivid can be imagined. That is the way
that a story is best told, by telling it, and letting it go to the
reader unaccompanied by sign-posts or directions how he shall
understand it and profit by it. Life teaches its lessons by
implication, not by didactic preaching; and literature is at its
best when it is an imitation of life and not an excuse for
instruction.</p>

<p>As to the humor of Mark Twain, it is scarcely necessary to
speak. It lends vividness to every page. The little touch in "Tom
Sawyer," page 105, where after the murder of which Tom was an
eye-witness, it seemed "that his school-mates would never get done
holding inquests on dead cats and thus keeping the trouble present
to his mind," and that in the account of the spidery six-armed girl
of Emmeline's picture in "Huckleberry Finn," are in the author's
happiest vein. Another admirable instance is to be seen in
Huckleberry Finn's mixed feelings about rescuing Jim, the negro,
from slavery. His perverted views regarding the unholiness of his
actions are most instructive and amusing. It is possible to feel,
however, that the fun in the long account of Tom Sawyer's
artificial imitation of escapes from prison is somewhat forced;
everywhere simplicity is a good rule, and while the account of the
Southern <i>vendetta</i> is a masterpiece, the caricature of books
of adventure leaves us cold. In one we have a bit of life; in the
other Mark Twain is demolishing something that has no place in the
book.</p>

<p>Yet the story is capital reading, and the reason of its great
superiority to "Tom Sawyer" is that is it, for the most part, a
consistent whole. If Mark Twain would follow his hero through
manhood, he would condense a side of American life that, in a few
years, will have to be delved out of newspapers, government
reports, county histories, and misleading traditions by
unsympathetic sociologists.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<a href="hucrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="atlanta.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="pwathena">
<head>
<title>Athenaeum Reviews Pudd'nhead</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 British Mixed </keyword> -->
<h2><i>Athenaeum</i> [unsigned]<br>
1895: January 19</h2>

<br>


<p>The best thing in <i>Pudd'nhead Wilson</i>, by Mark Twain
(Chatto &amp; Windus), is the picture of the negro slave Roxana,
the cause of all the trouble which gives scope to Mr. Wilson's
ingenious discovery about finger-marks. Her gusts of passion or of
despair, her vanity, her motherly love, and the glimpses of nobler
feelings that are occasionally seen in her elementary code of
morals, make her very human, and create a sympathy for her in spite
of her unscrupulous actions. But hers is the only character that is
really striking. Her son is a poor creature, as he is meant to be,
but he does not arrest the reader with the same unmistakable
reality: his actions are what might be expected, but his
conversations, especially with Wilson and the Twins, seem
artificial and forced. Wilson, the nominal hero, appears to most
advantage in the extracts from his calendar which head the
chapters, but as a personage he is rather too shadowy for a hero.
And what has to be said about the book must be chiefly about the
individuals in it, for the story in itself is not much credit to
Mark Twain's skill as a novelist. The idea of the change of babies
is happy, and the final trial scene is a good piece of effect; but
the story at times rambles on in an almost incomprehensible way.
Why drag in, for example, all the business about the election,
which is quite irrelevant? and the Twins altogether seem to have
very little <i>raison d'etre</i> in the book. Of course there are
some funny things in the story, it would not be by Mark Twain if
there were not, but the humour of the preface might very well be
spared; it is in bad taste. Still, if the preface be skipped the
book well repays reading just for the really excellent picture of
Roxana.</p>

<a href="pwrevshp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="pwnytrev.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="pwbookmn">
<head>
<title>Bookman Reviews Pudd'nhead</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 British Favorable</keyword> -->
<h2><i>The Bookman</i> [unsigned]<br>
1895: January 7</h2>

<p>Every scientific experiment or discovery of direct human import
is soon followed by fiction of which it forms the basis. That the
finger-print method of identification has not sooner provided the
matter of a tale is surprising. Mark Twain uses it here
ingeniously. "Pudd'nhead" is another name for fool; it is applied
hastily to Mr. David Wilson, a lawyer and surveyor, who in his
leisure hours amuses himself with making "records" of the finger
tips of his acquaintances. In the case of two children born on the
same day, and bearing a strong resemblance to each other, one a
child of consequence, the other the child of a slave girl, he made
continuous records. Then one of them, the wrong one of course, was
sold with the slave mother. The reader can develop the story from
that point, or if not, Mark Twain will do it for him. As the
mistake lasts for twenty-three hard years, in spite of Pudd'nhead
Wilson's cleverness, the end is prevented from being a very
cheerful one.</p>

<a href="pwrevshp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="pwcosmo.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="pwcosmo">
<head>
<title>Cosmopolitan Reviews Pudd'nhead</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 American Eastern Favorable</keyword> -->
<h2><i>Cosmopolitan</i> [H.H. Boyesen]<br>
1895: January 18</h2>

<p>Let me add, for the sake of a transition, that Mark Twain, whose
"Puddin'-Head Wilson" I have just finished, is even more unique
among humorists. Here we have a novel of the ante-bellum days in
Missouri, rather melodramatic in plot, and full of the liveliest
kind of action. If anybody but Mark Twain had undertaken to tell
that kind of story, with exchanges of infants in the cradle, a hero
with negro taint in his blood substituted for the legitimate white
heir, midnight encounters in a haunted house between the false heir
and his colored mother, murder by the villain of his supposed uncle
and benefactor, accusation of an innocent foreigner, and final
sensational acquittal and general unraveling of the tangled skein
-- if, I say, anybody else had had the hardihood to utilize afresh
this venerable stage machinery of fiction, we should have been
tempted to class his work with such cheap stuff as that of Wilkie
Collins, Hugh Conway, and the dime novelists. But Mark Twain,
somehow, has lifted it all into the region of literature. In the
first place, the alleged extracts from Puddin'-Head Wilson's
calendar are inimitably droll and witty. Take, for instance,
this:</p>

<p>"There is no character, howsoever good and fine, but it can be
destroyed by ridicule, howsoever poor and witless. Observe the ass,
for instance: his character is about perfect; he is the choicest
spirit among the humbler animals; yet see what ridicule has brought
him to. Instead of feeling complimented, when we are called an ass,
we are left in doubt."</p>

<p>Then again, the Missouri village in which the scene is laid, is
so vividly realized in its minutest details; and the people, in all
their fatuous prejudice and stolidity, are so credible and
authentic, so steeped in the local atmosphere, that the illusion
becomes perfect, and we swallow the melodrama without a qualm, --
exchange of heirs, haunted house, murder, and all, -- and scarcely
dream that we have been duped, until we wake up with a start at the
end of the last chapter. "Tell the truth, or trump, -- but take the
trick," is one of Puddin'-Head Wilson's maxims; and the author, to
make assurance doubly sure, has done both. He evidently has an
ample fund of experience to draw upon; and he possesses, also, that
high imaginative faculty which does not consist in crude invention,
but in shaping remembered truth into logical and artistic
coherence. His people stand squarely upon their feet, not because
he has so constructed them, but because he has known their type and
been familiar with their looks, speech, and habits. How deliciously
rich, racy, and copious is, for instance, his negro talk. The very
gurgling laugh and cooing cadence seem, somehow, implied in the
text; and the fancy instinctively adds the vivid miens and
gestures. Since Mark Twain wrote his "Tom Sawyer" and "Roughing
It," he has published no book comparable in interest to
"Puddin'-Head Wilson."</p>

<p>-- Hjalmar Hjorth Boyesen</p>

<a href="pwrevshp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="pwathena.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="pwcritic">
<head>
<title>The Critic Reviews Pudd'nhead</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 British Mixed </keyword> -->
<h2><i>Critic</i> [unsigned]<br>
1895: May 11</h2>

<p>The literary critic is often puzzled how to classify the
intellectual phenomena that come within his ken. His business is of
course primarily with <i>literature</i>. A work may be infinitely
amusing, it may abound even with flashes and touches of genius, and
yet the form in which it comes into the world may be so crude, so
coarse, so erring from the ways of true classicism, so offensive to
immemorial canons of taste, that the critic, in spite of his
enjoyment and wonder, puts it reluctantly down in the category of
unclassifiable literary things only to take it up and enjoy it
again!</p>

<p>Of such is <i>Pudd'nhead Wilson</i>, and, for that matter, Mark
Twain in general. The author is a signal example of sheer genius,
without training or culture in the university sense, setting forth
to conquer the world with laughter whether it will or no, and to
get himself thereby acknowledged to be the typical writer of the
West. He is the most successful of a class of American humorists
whose impulse to write off their rush of animal spirits is
irresistible, and who snatch at the first pen within reach as the
conductor of their animal electricity. If we look at other national
humorists, like Aristophanes, Cervantes, Moliere or Swift, we find
their humor expressed in an exquisite literary form, in which a
certain polish tempers the extravagance, and annoying metrical (or
it may be imaginative) difficulties have been overcome. What
wonderful bird-rhythms and wasp melodies and cloud-architecture, so
to speak, emerge from the marvellous choral interludes of the Greek
comedian; what suave literary graces enclose the gaunt outlines of
Don Quixote; in what honeyed verse are Alceste and Tartuffe
entangled, and what new, nervous, powerful prose describes the
adventures of Gulliver! When we turn our eyes westward we encounter
Judge Haliburton, Hosea Biglow, Uncle Remus, Mark Twain -- an
absolutely new <i>genre</i> distinct from what we had previously
studied in the line of originalities. The one accomplished artist
among these is Lowell, whose university traditions were very strong
and controlled his bubbling humor. The others are pure
"naturalists" -- men of instinctive genius, who have relied on
their own conscious strength to produce delight in the reader,
irrespective of classicity of form, literary grace or any other of
the beloved conventions on which literature as literature has
hitherto depended. This is true in a less degree of Uncle Rcmus
than of Judge Haliburton and Mark Twain.</p>

<p><i>Pudd'nhead Wilson</i> is no exception to the rule. It is a
Missouri tale of changelings "befo' the wah," admirable in
atmosphere, local color and dialect, a drama in its way, full of
powerful situations, thrilling even; but it cannot be called in any
sense literature. In it Mark Twain's brightness and grotesqueness
and funniness revel and sparkle, and in the absurd extravaganza,
"Those Extraordinary Twins," all these comicalities reach the
buffoon point; one is amused and laughs unrestrainedly but then the
irksome question comes up: What <i>is</i> this? is it literature?
is Mr. Clemens a "writer" at all? must he not after all be
described as an admirable after-dinner storyteller -- humorous,
imaginative, dramatic, like Dickens -- who in an evil moment, urged
by admiring friends, has put pen to paper and written down his
stories? Adapted to the stage and played by Frank Mayo, the thing
has met with immediate success.</p>

<a href="pwrevshp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="pwidler">
<head>
<title>Idler Reviews Pudd'nhead</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1894 British Mixed </keyword> -->
<h2><i>Idler</i> [unsigned]<br>
1894: August</h2>

<p>[<i>This review seems to be based on the story's serial
publication in</i> The Century<i>, where it had just finished
appearing in June. The novel was not published until
November.</i>]</p>

<br>


<p><i>Puddenhead Wilson</i>, Mark Twain's latest story, is the work
of a novelist, rather than of a "funny man." There is plenty of
humour in it of the genuine Mark Twain brand, but it is as a
carefully painted picture of life in a Mississippi town in the days
of slavery that its chief merit lies. In point of construction it
is much the best story that Mark Twain has written, and of men and
women in the book at least four are undeniably creations, and not
one of them is overdrawn or caricatured, as are some of the most
popular of the author's lay figures. There is but one false note in
the picture, and that is the introduction of the two alleged
Italian noblemen. These two young men are as little like Italians
as they are like Apaches. When challenged to fight a duel, one of
them, having the choice of weapons, chooses revolvers instead of
swords. This incident alone is sufficient to show how little
Italian blood there is in Mark Twain's Italians. But this is a
small blemish, and if Mark Twain, in his future novels, can
maintain the proportion of only two lay figures to four living
characters, he will do better than most novelists. The extracts
from "Puddenhead Wilson's Almanac," which are prefixed to each
chapter of the book, simply "pizon us for more," to use Huck Finn's
forcible metaphor. Let us hope that a complete edition of that
unrivalled almanac will be issued at no distant day.</p>

<a href="pwrevshp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="pwsatrev.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="pwnytrev">
<head>
<title>New York Times Reviews Pudd'nhead</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 American Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<h2><i>New York Times</i> [unsigned]<br>
1895: January 27</h2>

[<i>This unusual "review" seems to assume everyone is already
familiar with the story of MT's novel, and focuses its attention
almost exclusively on the illustrations in the American edition. It
ignores or forgets about the illustrations that appeared with the
novel in</i> The Century Magazine<i>, and it attributes all the
marginal illustrations to one artist, though two different names
are attached to the pictures themselves.</i>]<br>
<br>


<center><font size="+1">Mark Twain's New Volume.</font></center>

<br>
 Thanks to an artist who, though he does not draw well, is clever
in grasping ideas, the fun and drollery and the comedy and tragedy
of two of Mark Twain's most interesting stories have been
multiplied many times. Those who have enjoyed "Pudd'nhead Wilson,"
with nothing but their imaginations to help them picture what sort
of man the hero of the story was and what the scenes were in which
he acted his part, will be glad to run through the story again
along with the artist, who, it may be assumed, has recorded in his
marginal pictures the author's material conceptions of the things
he has written about.

<p>They may see that "well-fed, well-petted, and properly-revered"
cat stretched at full length on the window ledge, "asleep and
blissful with her furry belly to the sun and a paw curved over her
nose." That was one of the sight's of Dawson's Landing. They may
see the tinmonger's pole standing on one of the chief corners of
the village, "wreathed from top to bottom with tin pots and pans
and cups," giving noisy notice to the world, when the wind blew,
that the tinmonger was close at hand ready for business. They may
look upon Wilson when, as he entered the village intent upon
establishing himself in the law business, he made the remark that
ruined him for the time being. "I wish I owned half that dog," said
Wilson. "Why?" somebody asked. "Because," answered Wilson, "I'd
kill my half." The villagers decided promptly that a man who did
not know that to kill half a dog would be death to the entire
animal was without that important requisite for a lawyer, a legal
mind.</p>

<p>So all through the story the illustrator accompanies the text.
He shows the village firemen drowning the old market house with
water pumped through the little hand engine; he shows Wilson, when
he had come to be somebody, addressing a mass meeting, a flag
flying over him bearing the announcement that he is conducting a
campaign for the Mayoralty, and in one of his best pictures he
illustrates the text, "A devil born to a young couple is measurably
recognizable by them before long; but a devil adopted by an old
couple is an angel to them and remains so through thick and
thin."</p>

<p>But it is in "Those Extraordinary Twins," which is the second
part of the volume, that the artist has done his cleverest work.
This undoubtedly is because the story is the funnier of the two.
There is an almost infinite amount of suggestion for an artist of
the humorous vein in the story of the two-headed man whom Twain
persists in regarding as really two men -- making one man sick
while the other is well; making one fight a duel while the other
protests against the performance; baptizing the good one while the
other sputters curses; hanging the bad one while the other looks
indignant, though he finally does consent to join in the
kicking.</p>

<p><br>
<a href="pwrevshp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="pwspecta.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align=
"right"></a></p>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="pwrevrev">
<head>
<title>Review of Reviews on Pudd'nhead</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1894 American Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<!-- <keyword>1894 American Eastern Mixed </keyword> -->
<h2><i>The American Monthly Review of Reviews</i> [unsigned]<br>
1894: January</h2>

[<i>This isn't really a review of the novel, but it is interesting
as a first response to the story. A regular feature of</i> The
Review of Reviews <i>was "The Periodicals Reviewed," a summary of
some of the main articles in many American, British and French
magazines and quarterlies. The following is from the account of the
contents of</i> The Century<i>, written after the first installment
of</i> Pudd'nhead Wilson <i>had appeared there in December, 1893.
MT's novel ran in</i> The Century <i>until June, 1894, but for some
reason</i> The Review of Reviews <i>never discussed or mentioned
the story again. It would have been interesting to know what
"moral" about race the author of this comment felt the novel
finally pointed.</i>] <br>
<br>
 The feature of the number [i.e. the December <i>Century</i>] so
far as fiction is concerned is the beginning of Mark Twain's serial
novel, "Pudd'n Head Wilson," the scene of which is laid in
Southwest Missouri thirty-five years ago. The first chapters give
but small indication of that humor which made Mr. Clemens' fame.
Curiously enough, the plot, if one may presume to prophesy from the
first chapters, is going to center around the mixing up of two
babies, one of whom is a white child and the other a mulatto with a
slight strain of negro blood, the two being under the charge of the
fond mulatto mother; so that we may expect to find Mark Twain
drawing some healthy moral concerning the race problem before we
are through with "Pudd'n Head Wilson."

<p><br>
<a href="pwrevshp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="pwsouthn.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align=
"right"></a></p>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="pwsatrev">
<head>
<title>Saturday Review Reviews Pudd'nhead</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1894 British Mixed </keyword> -->
<h2><i>Saturday Review</i> [unsigned]<br>
1894: December 29</h2>

<p>Mark Twain's last book is a story of mixed babies and the
ingenious detection of crime. It is not altogether another <i>
Huckleberry Finn</i>. On the other hand, it is a relief to find
that it is not another <i>Yankee at King Arthur's Court</i>. Roxy,
the slave woman, who changes the babies, is a delightful character,
who stirs us with a warm and ready interest. For the rest, there is
little that can be said to rouse enthusiasm. Pudd'nhead Wilson
himself is a little unreal, too much of the <i>deus ex machina</i>,
though there is much that is Twainian in the specimen sayings that
illustrate his wisdom. Every chapter is headed with these extracts,
and it is clear that Pudd'nhead Wilson is to Mark Twain what Poor
Richard was to Franklin. In the means by which Wilson detects the
murderer of Judge Driscoll we have an ingenious adaptation of the
system of thumb-impressions, originated by Sir W. Herschell in
India, as a method of identifying criminals. It is cleverly, if not
entirely persuasively, worked out in the story. But the sketch of
Roxy, the negress, is by far the finest thing in the book.</p>

<a href="pwrevshp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="pwbookmn.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="pwsouthn">
<head>
<title>Southern Reviews Pudd'nhead</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1894 American Southern Unfavorable </keyword> -->
<h2><i>Southern Magazine</i> [by Martha McCulloch Williams]<br>
1894: February</h2>

[<i>This is more an outraged response than a review. Williams wrote
it after the first two</i> Century Magazine <i>installments of <i>
Pudd'nhead</i> -- the first 8 chapters -- had appeared. There is no
evidence to indicate if her attitude toward the novel changed after
she had read it all. This is an unusual glimpse of a southern
reaction to one of MT's accounts of the South.</i>]<br>
<br>


<center><font size="+1">IN RE "PUDD'NHEAD WILSON."</font></center>

<br>


<p>A better title, perhaps, would be "The Decline and Fall of Mark
Twain;" for, looking at it solely as a piece of literature, there
is no denying, that his much-advertised serial is tremendously
stupid. If it were nothing more, the reading, even the critical,
world could afford to receive it in the charity of silence,
remembering the merry heart it has had these twenty years past
whenever it pleased Mr. Clemens to amuse it.</p>

<p>"Pudd'nhead Wilson" is more than stupid. So far as it has
appeared -- to the end of the second installment, that is -- it is
at once malicious and misleading. So much so, indeed, that
involuntarily one recalls the gentleman who, it was said, "went to
his memory for his wit, and his imagination for his facts."</p>

<p>It certainly seems to me that Mr. Clemens must have imagined all
the local color of his tale. It has to do with Dawson's Landing, a
small Missouri town on the Mississippi, populated largely with F.
F. V.'s, all of whom are slave-holders, as are the rest of the
inhabitants. Right here I wish to ask why it is that the Southern
man who has an honest and decent pride in the fact that he comes of
good stock fares so ill at the hands of certain literary gentlemen?
Bret Harte gives us Colonel Starbottle as his type. Mr. Cable has
won fame and fortune and the heart of the whole North by
demonstrating to its entire satisfaction how heartlessly and
continually all his well-born gentlemen overstep the color line.
Last of all, Mark Twain has set himself the task of showing how
impossible it is for a man to have a great-grandfather and, at the
same time, any regard for the Decalogue.</p>

<p>Perhaps the gentlemen are bent on gleaning the full harvest of
"Uncle Tom's Cabin." Perhaps, too, they are wise in so doing. In my
seven years North, I have more than once been asked by people who
regarded themselves as very well informed "if there were still in
the South any pure blacks at all, or any pure-blooded whites?" At
first such questioning made me angry. Later, I have come to
recognize it as the legitimate outcome of the deliverances of Mr.
Cable and his school. Now that Mark Twain has come under their
banner, the impression will doubtless become more than ever
current. For he has -- and has deserved -- the widest public of any
living American writer. And it is a melancholy fact that the sheep
instinct of humanity is so strong as to make it follow <i>en
masse</i> into any pasture of opinion where he may lead. A still
more melancholy fact is the inability of many folk to judge a thing
with eyes blinded by the glamour of a great reputation.</p>

<p>Otherwise, I think, some one would have risen ere this to
protest against some of Mr. Clemens' gentle idiosyncrasies
displayed in the first installment. For instance, the character of
Pembroke Howard, introduced solely that the author might tell us
that Howard, too, was an F. F. V., also that "he was popular with
the people" -- and that the story has no sort of concern with him.
A while later he is permitted to die. At least there is a line to
that effect. What I want to know, and would like to ask Mr Clemens,
is how a man can be "popular with the people," since popular means
of, by, or with the people. It does assuredly seem to me pretty
queer usage for a man who was so lately toasted and feted by the
Lotos Club, as the leading exponent of literary art.</p>

<p>That is by no means a solitary gem of its kind. Careful reading
shows the like upon almost every page. It is not too much to say,
in fact, that there is slovenly construction in every other
paragraph. But the manner is a trifling burden compared with the
matter of it. First to last, the writer seemed to feel his burden
of humor-with-malice-aforethought. He had chosen his place, his
people. If the facts about them are not humorous, so much the worse
for facts.</p>

<p>Witness the naming of the hero. He had come out of Western New
York to practice law in the Missouri town. One day, hearing a dog
bark, be indulges in the Joe-Millerism of wishing he owned half the
dog so he might make an end of it. Thereupon the bystanders "fell
away from him as something uncanny, and went into privacy to
discuss him, One said; "'Pears to be a fool.'</p>

<p>"'Pears? ' said another. '<i>Is</i>, I reckon. Said he wished he
owned half the dog.'</p>

<p>"'The idiot,' said a third. ' What did he reckon would become of
the other half if he killed his half? Do you reckon he thought it
would live ?'</p>

<p>"' In my opinion he ain't got any mind.'</p>

<p>" No. 3 said: 'Well, he's a lummox,, anyway.'</p>

<p>"'That's what he is,' said No. 4 'He's a labrick; just a Simon
pure labrick: if ever there was one.'</p>

<p>"'Yes, sir, he's a damn fool, that's the way I put him up,' said
No, 5. 'Any body can think different that wants to. but those are
my sentiments '</p>

<p>"'I am with you gentlemen,' said No. 6. 'Perfect jackass -- yes,
and it ain't going too far to say he is a pudd'nhead. If he ain't a
pudd'nhead, I ain't no judge, that's all.'</p>

<p>"Mr. Wilson stood elected. The incident was told all over town
and gravely discussed by everybody. Within a week he had lost his
first name. Pudd'nhead took its place."</p>

<p>This is humor, as the great editors understand it. To one a
little bit conversant with the folk who are supposed to be
humorous, it seems, contrariwise, something cheap and thin.
Throughout the Southwest, for at least seventy five years, "I'd
like to own that dog -- and kill my half " has been a cant saying
so commonly current that it is laughed at only out of compliment to
the user of it. The men who should now perpetrate it as original
would perhaps be called something worse than a "pudd'nhead," but
very certainly nobody -- not the most ignorant -- would find in it
a suggestion of uncanniness. For the thing is so common and
proverbial that little children make use of it, or rather of its
implication. More than one small lad has told me, rejoicing, "Ma
has stopped her half of me from going to school." And one shrewd
young person within my knowledge bought half of a coveted dolly,
then insisted on a property-right to play with it all the time.</p>

<p>So, too, of Mr. Clemens' young man who went away East to
college, and came back with "Eastern polish," whatever that may be
-- perhaps perfect fitting clothes and a habit of wearing gloves.
His old friends overlooked the polish of the clothes, but could not
forgive the glove habit, so he was left solitary. This is some
more, doubtless, of Mr. Clemens' very peculiar humor. He ought,
however, to have stated the fact in a foot note. He might have been
at the same pains about the reception to the Brothers Capollo. His
account of the honors thrust upon them is doubtless a sly revenge
upon the misguided Southern communities, which have stretched out
admiring hands to Mr. Clemens when he would rather they did
not.</p>

<p>So much for the accidentals of the tale. To deal adequately with
the story itself, either in motif or atmosphere, would require more
time and space than I, at present, command. It is built around the
exchange of two children, born the same day, to one father. One his
wife's son; the other, his slave's. The wife dies; the slave
mother, who has sixteen parts of white blood to one of black, has
sole charge of both babies. After a while, her master (as is the
custom of Virginia gentlemen in the hands of high literary
persons),for some biding fault, sells all the other house servants,
though as a mark of magnanimity he sells them at home instead of
sending them down the river. The life-likeness of this part will be
apparent to every ex slave owner, especially to such as remember
how far beyond rubies was in those days the price of a thoroughly
excellent servant. Setting wholly aside the human affection that
often subsisted between white and black, few men were so foolish as
to inconvenience themselves by entire change of <i>menege</i>,
without the most imperative necessity for such a proceeding. All
that is, however, beside the mark. This sale goes forward, and as a
result, Roxy, the white slave, puts her son in his half brother's
place to save him from the possibility of such a fate.</p>

<p>She also puts her creator -- Mark Twain -- in rather a hard
dilemma. To his mind the only man worth either saving or damning in
all the South country is the black man. The exigencies of fiction,
however, make it necessary that the grave baby, who normally would
grow up a pen feathered angel, shall, as his own young master, grow
up a pretty respectable devil. Similarly, the white child must be,
by the change of position, endowed with all the virtue and grace of
the subject race. Anybody can see that it is hard lines for the
writer, One can fancy him apologizing beforehand to the little
negro for the violence he is compelled to do his character. He
makes the plunge and the double transformation boldly. It is more
than a little amusing, though, to one who knows experimentally the
autocracy of a "black mammy," to read how Roxy, after the exchange,
was surprised to see how steadily and surely the awe which had kept
her tongue reverent, her manner humble towards her young master,
was transferring itself to her speech and manner toward the
usurper. Roxy must have been a mighty exceptional character if she
did not spank her charges with natural and noble impartiality,
whether they were white or black.</p>

<p>She had christened her own child "Valet de Chambre -- no
surname. Slaves hadn't the privilege." That is some more news to us
who owned them, and who keep lively memories of their pride in
their surnames; and how tenaciously, after freedom came, they clung
to the appellations whereunto they felt themselves born. In
founding their families under the new conditions, it was often
laughable to see the leaning to aristocracy. In more than one case
within my own knowledge, negroes abandoned the names of the living
masters, in favor of that of the master's grandfather from whom
they were inherited and to whose family they leaned because of is
greater distinction. Truly, if they had had no privilege of
surnames, there must have been confusion worse confounded in the
era '65.</p>

<p>Time and patience fell alike in bringing to book all such
matters here set down. Suffice it to say that, first to last, the
whole recital is unveracious. If it is meant for caricature, the
result is the same as would come from exaggerating the ear, nose,
and coat-tails of a Bowery tough, and labelling the picture "Ward
McAllister." So far as I know, all that the South, either "Old" or
"New," has ever done to Mr. Clemens has been to buy his books, when
it had precious little money to buy anything, and to set him upon a
pedestal as the very prince of humorists. Wherefore, I quite fail
to comprehend why it pleases him to villify us as he is doing in
this book.</p>

<p>Let me add that I am no bigot in behalf of mine own people. Some
have foibles, faults galore, even sins of deepest dye. There are
knaves and fools among them -- uncouth fellows not a few, So much I
readily grant. I will go further and admit that there is that in
the social constitution which, rightly handled, might give a
humorist scope to add largely to the gaiety of nations. But take
them by little and large, they are neither sordid nor stolid, nor
lacking in the finer parts of humanity. All this Mr. Clemens makes
them out to be. And because he is who he is, a large part of our
common country will take his circus-posters for accurate
photographs of life and people in the South. Solely for that
reason, I make, here and now, my protest against this injustice. I
can not comfort myself with the belief that he has sinned
ignorantly against half his countrymen. His experience has been too
wide, his intelligence is too keen, for that. He is, it seems to
me, thus unveracious for revenue only. He has found out the sort of
book that soils [sells?] best. It is not that which speaks the
truth as it is, but as the reader wishes to believe it to be.
Beside, it is only against a background so lurid as the one be he
manufactured that the action of his story could possibly take
place. As an occasional dabbler in fiction, I recognize the
strength of that necessity. But I can not hold that it is
sufficient to justify the falsification of all historic conditions.
A long time ago, I read a speech of Mr. Clemens in which he said,
at the outset, that he had chosen something he knew nothing
whatever about so as to be quite unhampered by facts. To judge from
"Pudd'nhead Wilson," he has contracted a habit of being unhampered
by facts -- a habit which seems to grow stronger with age.</p>

<p>Martha McCulloch Williams</p>

<a href="pwrevshp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="pwidler.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="pwspecta">
<head>
<title>Spectator Reviews Pudd'nhead</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 British Favorable</keyword> -->
<h2><i>Spectator</i> [unsigned]<br>
1895: March 16</h2>

<p>--Has Mr. Samuel L. Clemens found Missouri audiences or readers
slow to appreciate his jokes? Mr. David Wilson comes to a Missouri
town to push his fortunes. Unluckily his first utterance when he
lands from a steamer -- did steamboats pass "every hour or so" up
and down the Mississippi in 1830? -- is about a yelping dog, that
if he owned half of the beast he would kill his half. This would
have been a fair joke in New York; to the Missourians it seemed
proof positive that the speaker was a fool. Hence the sobriquet of
"Pudd'nhead" which the public opinion of the town fastens upon him.
But he doesn't deserve it. On the contrary, he is a clever fellow.
He understands, for instance, how the impressions of finger-tips
may be made proofs of identity -- is not this again a little before
date in 1830? This is the point of the story, which is a somewhat
gloomy but powerful tale of the slavery times. "Mark Twain's"
negroes are not of the Uncle Tom type; but the story is not on that
account a less vigorous indictment of the old social order of the
South.</p>

<a href="pwrevshp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="pwcritic.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="quincywg">
<head>
<title>Major Dallam's Plug</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1867 Lecture Savages Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2>An Illinois Plug</h2>
</center>

[<i>This tribute to Mark Twain as a lecturer was written by Major
Dallam, and published in the</i> Quincy (Illinois) Whig <i>in
advance of MT's April 9, 1867, lecture in Quincy. According to
Walter Frear, this notice was reprinted in the Keokuk papers before
MT lectured there as well. It's telling that even this fellow
"westerner" takes pains to reassure his audience that MT's humor is
not vulgar. It's curious that the account makes no mention of MT's
local roots, even though Quincy is just across the river from
Hannibal.</i>]<br>


<p>We had a call, yesterday, from an old friend, Mark Twain (Sam
Clemens, Esq.), the California humorist whom we had not seen since
we parted from him on the sunward side of the Sierra Nevadas some
three years ago. The aroma of sage brush does not hang around him
still. The gentle "Washoe Zephyrs," which lifted a loaded quartz
wagon with remarkable ease, have left no rough traces upon his
good-humored face. The many feet which he once owned in Washoe,
"wild cat" claims, out of which he expected to realize untold
wealth, have long since been "sold for assessments," and yet he can
still laugh, and make others laugh. He is, indeed, "a fellow of
infinite jest" -- as our friends may learn to their entire
satisfaction by attending a lecture which he proposes to give in
this city on Tuesday next.</p>

<p>Mark's funny stories and quaint sayings are not so well known
here as in California, where they have secured for him a reputation
not surpassed by any humorist that ever attempted to amuse that
people, who are, perhaps, more critical than any other community in
the Union.</p>

<p>His wit and his style are peculiarly his own -- original, racy
and irresistible.</p>

<p>The first time we heard Mark was at Carson City, the capital of
the State of Nevada, on the assembling of the Territorial
Legislature in the winter of 1863-4. Hon. James W. Nye (now U.S.
Senator) was then Governor of the Territory. After the delivery of
the inaugural to the "assembled wisdom" of Silverland, Mark Twain
took the speaker's stand and delivered his inaugural as Governor of
the Territory chosen by the "Third House," to a very large audience
of gentlemen and about all the ladies then in Carson City. It was
received with great applause and roars of laughter. Mark gave the
Governor some hard hits, in a sly way, but no one enjoyed the fun
more than rotund and rubicund Nye.</p>

<p>The lovers of genial humor will find nothing coarse or vulgar in
Mark Twain's lecture. He also sometimes (by mistake, he says)
indulges in beautiful flights of fancy and eloquence. But of his
talent as a lecturer, our citizens will soon have an opportunity of
judging, and we bespeak for him, in advance, a fair audience.</p>

<a href="sandmdwst.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="../mtbib.html#42"><img src="../mtbib.gif" align=
"right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="sandrev1">
<head>
<title>Boston Reviews Savages</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1869 Lecture Savages Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center><img src="sandrev1.jpg" alt=
"The Boston Daily Evening Transcript, November 11, 1869"></center>

<center>
<h2>LOCAL INTELLIGENCE</h2>
</center>

<hr width="30%">
<p>Mark Twain discoursed about the Sandwich Islands for an hour
last night at the Music Hall, and although at the early part of the
lecture there was evidently some disappointment, he soon was in
favor with his hearers, and the last two-thirds of the production
were richly enjoyed. Mr. Clemens is truly an original lecturer, his
manner being as unique as his matter. He spoke without notes,
walked about the stage most of the time, and was dry and droll,
serious and even pathetic. His matter was a series of surprises, it
being difficult for the listener to know what was earnest and what
was fun. His most ludicrous jokes were related with a serious air,
that imparted a fresh flavor to them. The entertainment, for such
indeed it was, was a very enjoyable one, so enjoyable and peculiar
that all attempts to describe it would fail. The hearty applause
given indicated that the audience were pleased.</p>

<hr width="80%">
<font size="+1"><i>Boston Daily Advertiser,</i><br>
November 11, 1869</font>

<center>
<h2>Mark Twain on "The Sandwich Islands."</h2>
</center>

Boston had a very novel, if not a very startling, sensation last
evening in the shape of a lecture from Mr. Samuel L. Clemens, who
is known to fame as the humorist Mark Twain. Known to fame, we say,
for who that breathes the vital air in America has not heard of the
jumping frog of Calaveras County, California? and who has not read
of the "new specimen" which Mark Twain made by combining a hawk and
a crow in "one neat job"? A company, even greater than that which
usually attends the Bureau lectures, assembled in the Music Hall
that night with faces primed for merriment, and punctually to the
hour Mr. Clemens and Mr. Redpath appeared upon the platform. This
was of course, and it was also of course that for fifteen minutes
afterwards the speaker's voice should be made inaudible by the
rustling and creaking and tramping of the regular crowd of the
tardy.

<p>Mark Twain is a very good looking man. He is of medium height
and moderately slender build, has light brown hair, a reddish brown
moustache, regular features and a fresh complexion; and he has a
queer way of wrinkling up his nose and half closing his eyes when
he speaks. The expression of his face is as calm and imperturbable
as that of the sphinx. Looking at him you feel it to be an
impossibility that he should ever hurry or ever be out of temper,
and you might suppose him to be incapable of a joke, if it were not
for the peculiar twinkle in his merry eyes. His voice is remarkably
light and remarkably dry--like some German wines--and it seems to
be modulated to only two keys. His style of speaking is unique to
the last degree. It is all of a piece with the quality of his
humor, and fits him like a glove. He delivers his sentences without
haste, and in a tone of utter indifference, marking the highest
waves of his thought only by a strong flavor of nasality, and
knowing for the most part only the rising inflection at the
beginning, middle and end of his sentences. The rising inflection
is not native here, nor is it born in the manner of any of our own
speakers. Mr. Dickens first taught us how it might be used to
advantage; and Mark Twain, doubtless without borrowing a leaf from
Mr. Dickens's note-book, has found out for himself how effective an
adjunct it is to humorous speech. In short, the platform manner of
Mr. Clemens is the exact reflection in speech of his peculiar style
of composition. The fun of both is genuine enough; but the
perception of the fun is unmeasurably heightened by the apparently
serious intention of the general discourse, and at times by an air
of half seriousness in the joke itself. The audience gets into a
queer state after a while. It knows not what to trust; for while
much is meant to be seriously taken, the fun is felt to be the real
life of the thing; and yet they never know where the fun will come
in. Even when Mr. Clemens has made a really fine period, or
introduced a brilliant descriptive passage, he takes pains to turn
the affair into a joke at the end. As, for instance, after a very
graphic and well written description of the great volcanic eruption
in the Sandwich Islands, delivered with perfect indifference and
almost as if with an effort--he paused for just an instant, and
then said in the same passionless tone--"There! I'm glad I've got
that volcano off my mind." The manner is a direct resultant of the
matter; and the manner of his speech does a great deal for the
substance of his discourse. The story of "Our Fellow-Savages in the
Sandwich Islands" would not be nearly so funny to read as it is to
hear from Mark Twain's lips;--though we do not mean to deny that
there is a great deal of genuine and irresistible humor in the
texture of the discourse. Indeed, we mean to say, distinctly, that
the contrary was the fact, and that Mr. Clemens showed himself last
night in the character of a very quaint, peculiar, and eminently
original humorist. America has produced, at least, a quintette of
genuine humorists, whose productions have many of the <i>
indicia</i> of genius, if they are not wholly inspired by it.</p>

<p>We are obliged to say again, as we said in the cases of Nasby
and Josh Billings, that there is little use in trying to write a
sketch of the discourse. But we must attempt to give our readers a
little taste of the speaker's quality. Mr. Clemens devoted the
first ten minutes of his lecture to a painfully accurate
description of a person afflicted with the most loathsome form of
Oriental leprosy; and then he gave five minutes to the narration of
a boyish adventure which ended in his seeing the horrible face of a
dead man in the moonlight. And all this mass of horror for what?
Simply that he might say that his memory was full of unpleasant
things so linked together that when he thought of one he inevitably
thought of another, and so on through the entire series; and
starting with leprosy and dead faces in the moonlight his mind
necessarily ran through other unpleasant things until it brought
him to the Sandwich Islands and his lecture. The position of the
islands he gave geographically; but why they were placed so far
away from everything and in such an inconvenient space, he declined
to consider. The man who would have discovered the islands but did
not, he said, was diverted from his course by a manuscript found in
a bottle; and this, said Mark Twain, is not the only case in which
a man has been turned from the true path by suggestions drawn from
a bottle. The European nations brought into the islands their own
diseases, together with civilization, education and other
calamities. The effect of this had been to diminish the native
population;--education in particular causing a frightful mortality
as the facilities for learning were multiplied. But fifty thousand
natives are now left upon the islands, and it is proposed to start
a few more seminaries to finish them. The country people of the
islands, the women, he said, wear a single garment made of one
piece; "and the men don't." But when the weather is inclement the
men wear cotton in their ears. The hospitality of the people he
declared to be of a very high and generous order. A stranger might
enter any house and straightway his host would set before him raw
fresh fish with the scales on, baked dogs, fricasseed cats, and all
the luxuries of the season. But in trade they were exceedingly
sharp and deceitful,--lying invariably from one end of the
transaction to the other; not descending to common lies either, but
indulging in lies that are "gorgeously imposing and that awe you by
their grandeur." The fondness of the islanders for dogs he declared
to be intense. Dogs had the best of everything and were the close
companions of the men. "They fondle and caress the dog until he is
a full grown dog, and then they eat him." "I couldn't do that,"
said Mr. Clemens, in one of his dryest and funniest passages; "I'd
rather go hungry two days than eat an old personal friend in that
way."</p>

<p>At one point in his lecture, namely, in the midst of a
discussion of cannibalism, Mark Twain paused and said with an
indescribable look: "At this point I usually illustrate cannibalism
before the audience: but I am a stranger here, and feel diffident
about asking favors." However, he said, if there is any one present
who is willing to contribute a baby for the purposes of the
lecture, I should be glad to know it now. I am aware, though, that
children have become scarce and high of late, having been thinned
out by neglect and ill treatment since the woman movement
began.</p>

<p>But we must leave the rest to the imagination of our readers,
only saying that Mr. Clemens told two of the funniest of
exaggerated stories in the most irresistible fashion, and concluded
his lecture with a few graceful words of thanks to the audience for
their attention. Perhaps he is not a great humorist, but he is a
genuine humorist. The man who can say that the Islanders' dish of
plain dog "is only our cherished American sausage with the mystery
removed" is one whose reputation fame will not suffer to die; and
if Mr. Clemens can please everywhere as he pleased in Boston last
night, he will be sure to make his fortune if he does not become a
standard author.</p>

<hr width="80%">
<p>[<i>MT's Boston lecture was also reviewed in a report to the</i>
Springfield Daily Republican<i>.</i>]</p>

<font size="+1"><i>The Springfield Daily Republican</i>,<br>
Saturday, Nov. 13, 1869</font>

<center><b><i>FROM BOSTON.</i></b>
<hr width="20%">
<b>Letter from "Warrington."</b><br>
 From Our Own Correspondent.

<p><font size="-1">THE LECTURE SEASON.<br>
NASBY--MARK TWAIN--DE CORDOVA.</font></p>
</center>

<p>I was going to head this paragraph "The Humorist Lecturers," but
the only professed humorist among the three men I have named is
Mark Twain. De Cordova is not a humorist at all; and Nasby's humor
is subordinate to his radicalism and reformatory power. De Cordova
is a nice looking person and is well dressed. "He is put upon the
stage unexceptionably," as the theatrical critics say of a new
piece at Selwyn's. The screen, the foot-lights, the music stand on
which he places his manuscript, are all very nice, and you are
somewhat reminded of Dickens when you look at the whole
arrangement. And De Cordova is not unlike Dickens in his
gesticulation, being very active and sprightly and dramatic on his
platform. But his lecture is very thin stuff. I heard him describe
the sham family. Ezra Penniman and Anastasia Johnson,--if I have
their names right,--were portrayed justly enough, and all the
others of the intermarried Penniman-Johnson family; and the bits
were all fair, and in the direction of justice and good sense. But
the satire was of the mildest sort. Mr De Cordova is, among the
lecturers, what one of the illustrated weeklies of the poorer sort
would be among newspapers, provided it were better printed and on
better paper. There is no wit in him, and no humor. His audience,
however, seemed pleased, and not bored by his vivacious
nothingness. Nasby applied his remarkable powers of irony and fun
to the woman question. I have a little doubt whether his lecture
was enjoyed by all his hearers. In the first place the woman cause
is not so far advanced that a lecturer who supports the common
sense view can be sure of the entire sympathy of an average Boston
audience. The Fraternity ticket holders may be supposed to be more
radically inclined than any others, but there must be, even among
these, many ignorant persons, such as follow Fulton, who are not
converted, and are probably incapable of conversion. Then the
finest irony, such as Nasby's requires, except in the quickest
witted, rather too great a strain of attention for its full
appreciation, and for this reason I think Nasby would do well to
make his lecture (at least until the people become familiar with
the woman question,) mainly argumentative, and let the irony and
fun come in frequently and in spurts. I noticed that when, near the
close of his speech, he left his assumed character of the
conservative, and spoke earnestly in his true radical shape, he got
the largest amount of applause. By and by, when the apologists for
the subjection of woman are as few and as bad-charactered as the
apologists for slavery, Nasby's lecture will be as greatly relished
as his wonderful letters. His manner on the stage is not specially
happy. He reads, and hurries through his lecture. Lowell says of
Alcott, comparing him to a lamb, that "he goes to sure death when
he goes to his pen," and I might almost say, so great is the
difference between Nasby as a lecturer and as a writer, that he
goes to his death when he goes <i>from</i> his pen. But this would
not be true. His lecture was a success. It was in argument
admirable. Nobody in this country has so keen a scent for a humbug
as Nasby. How much he did for us by his inimitable satires upon
Johnson and the negro-hating democracy. And now, as I am rejoiced
to see, he makes his quarry that glorified and ermined imposture,
Chief Justice Chase, and I wish him equal success in hunting him
down. May he live long to lecture as well as to write. Mark Twain
is a man of a different sort. He (and Nasby also as I am informed),
was very nervous at the idea of meeting a Boston audience, though
what there is in a Boston audience to frighten anybody I cannot
imagine. Boston people are moved by the same appeals, they laugh at
the same jokes, yawn at the same dullness, wonder at the same
platitudes, as other people. There was no occasion for anxiety in
either case. Twain cut his lecture short, finishing it at about 20
minutes before nine, evidently afraid that he was boring his
hearers. The best tribute I can give to his performance is to say
that I was very sorry to lose the other half hour, to which, as a
paying dead-head critic, I thought myself entitled. The lecture was
delivered without notes, and so, prima facie, had an advantage over
Nasby's. Voice, manner, gesticulation, were all good; and the
drawl, whether natural or a trick of art, was an effective aid to
the story and the joke. There was no inconsiderable amount of
information about the Sandwich Islands and the Kanakas, and some
admirable bits of description, so admirable, indeed, that I felt
myself a little misused when, getting ready to applaud a genuine
piece of eloquence, I was interrupted by the remark, in a low tone,
"There, I'm glad I've got that volcano off my mind." Or, "There, I
call that rather neat." The Advertiser has so cleverly picked out
the plums of this discourse, that I will not quote much. The remark
about the islanders' dish of plain dog, that "it is only our
cherished American sausage with the mystery removed," is likely to
live as long as the best of the anti-sausage jokes. The story of
the man who was thrown into the air by the premature explosion of a
blast, while he was tamping the charge, and who went up and up till
he was but a speck in the sky, and then came down and down and
struck his crowbar into the same hole and went on tamping again,
was irresistibly funny, and its nub, viz: that the man, though gone
only fifteen minutes, had that amount of time deducted from his
pay, was better even than the story itself. The proposition to
illlustrate cannibalism by an experiment if anyone among the
audience would contribute a baby for the purpose, was perhaps the
funniest thing in the lecture, and it is hard to describe the dry
style of his following remark, quoted in the Advertiser, "I am
aware, though, that children have become scarce and high of late,
having been thinned out by neglect and ill-treatment since the
woman movement began." On the whole, Mark Twain is not only a
genuine humorist,--that we all know,--but an enjoyable and
successful lecturer.</p>

<a href="savsched.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="sandrev2">
<head>
<title>Philadelphia Reviews Savages</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1869 Lecture Savages Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<h2>From the Philadelphia <i>Press</i>,<br>
December 8, 1869</h2>

<br>


<p>Last evening the Academy was filled to overflowing, to partake
of the literary Sandwich prepared and offered by that
mirth-provoking humorist, Mark Twain. His lecture was appositely
introduced by a series of witty generalities closely connected with
cannibalism and craters. . . . The Sandwich Islands have a very
limited area--scarcely enough, indeed, to contain a voluminous
thought. . . . Mr. Twain, Esq., lecturer, etc., was a success. . .
. Twain is not riotous with his fancy; he is tenderly poetical and
discreet. His descriptions of the volcanoes of the islands were
very fine. They were exquisite set-offs to the humorous or rather
buttery parts of his ragout. We are at a loss to know whether he is
a wit or a humorist. At one time we had some distinct idea of the
difference between these two qualities, but Twain has literally
jumbled us all up. If it were not for Twain we should set him down
as a wit, but the inevitable presence causes us to classify him
with the humorists. . . . He is a rare combination of wit and
humor. He abounds in seasonable hits. He has no elocution, but
simply a style that knows no restraints but simply those necessary
to provoke mirth. His "Sandwich" is admirable for dyspepsia; even a
roast dog and fricasseed cat become agreeable after a little
familiarity. . . . The man who can administer to the mind healthful
relaxatives, and thereby restore the stomach, is certainly entitled
to rank with those who do the same with the stomach and thereby
restore the mind.</p>

<p>[Source: Frear, <i>Mark Twain and Hawaii</i>, Appendix D.]</p>

<hr width="55%">
<h2><i>Philadelphia Daily Evening Bulletin</i><br>
December 8, 1869</h2>

<center>
<h2>Mark Twain.</h2>
</center>

Mark Twain, the celebrated humorist, was honored last night with
one of the largest audiences ever assembled in the Academy of
Music. He lectured upon "The Sandwich Islands," and mingled with
much very interesting information a vast amount of humorous
anecdote, witty allusion, and of that odd, incongruous, surprising
divergence from his theme, which is his charming characteristic.
Mr. Clemens deserved the compliment bestowed upon him. We regard
him as the very best of the humorists of his class. He is more
extravagant and preposterous than John Phoenix; he is superior to
Artemus Ward, not only in the delicate quality of his humor, but
because he has a decent regard for the English language, and does
not depend for his effects upon barbarous orthography. John
Billings is not to be compared with him. Billings is merely a
proverbial philosopher who has some wit, plenty of hard common
sense, a shrewd knowledge of human nature, but not one particle of
genuine, irrepressible fun. He has said some good things, but they
are all marred by the wretched spelling which the author considers
necessary to his success. Mark Twain indulges in humor because it
is his nature to do so. It is impossible to read his productions or
to hear him speak without being impressed with the conviction that
his cleverest utterances are spontaneous, natural, unpremeditated.
Like all men of his temperament he has a hearty hatred of sham,
hypocrisy and cant, whether in religion, social life or politics.
Some of his sturdiest blows have been aimed at the follies of the
times; and we believe that he may, if he chooses, exercise a very
considerable influence as a reformer. Ridicule, cleverly used, is
one of the most powerful weapons against pretension and humbug; for
it not only robs them of their false dignity, but it appeals
strongly to the popular reader, and finds ready acceptance where
serious discussion would not be permitted. We do not suppose that
Mr. Clemens has any notion of starting out upon a mission of
reformation; but unconsciously he may do a good work in this
direction, while at the same time he furnishes the nation with the
purest and best entertainment in his lectures and his screeds.
There may be some who will regard his calling as of smaller dignity
than that of other men. Perhaps this is the class with which he is
at war. The mass of intelligent people will agree with us that
genuine humor is as rare and excellent a quality as any other, and
that it is as respectable to amuse mankind as to stupefy them. The
number of persons engaged in the former work is small; those who
attempt the latter abound in quantities.

<p><a href="savsched.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align=
"left"></a></p>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="sandrev3">
<head>
<title>New Haven Reviews Savages</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1869 Lecture Savages Eastern Unfavorable </keyword> -->
<center><img src="sandrev3.jpg" alt=
"The New Haven Daily Palladium, December 28, 1869"></center>

<center>
<h2><b>Public Entertainments.</b></h2>
</center>

<hr width="30%">
<p>Every one who went to Music Hall last evening--and there was a
good house despite the mist and mud--expected to go home splitting
their sides with laughter. People everywhere are familiar with
"Mark Twain," but comparatively few have yet had an opportunity of
seeing Mr. Samuel H. Clemens. An hour with Mark is like gentle dew
upon a withering flower; when he lifts the curtain and comes as Mr.
Clemens, the lecturer, it is like the tickling of a sleepy boy with
a feather--perfectly ravishing until the eyes are opened, but which
he doesn't care to experience a second time. Mr. Clemens is a true
wit, with his pen, and his works will live after he has gone, but
his course as a lecturer will end when the curiosity of his
thousands of readers shall have been satisfied by a good square
look at him. His lecture on "Our Fellow Savages of the Sandwich
Islands," is a tissue of nonsense from beginning to end, and his
delivery is as disgusting as the lecture is foolish. Still, people
clamor for a look, and we are inclined to think one dose will be
enough for the most admiring. The audience last evening enjoyed,
not the hearty laugh they anticipated, but a protracted, vexatious
titter, and felt relieved when the end came.</p>

<p><a href="savsched.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align=
"left"></a></p>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="sandrev4">
<head>
<title>Jamestown Reviews Savages</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1870 Lecture Savages Eastern Mixed </keyword> -->
<center><img src="sandrev4.jpg" alt=
"The Jamestown Journal, Friday, Jan. 28, 1870"></center>

<center><b>Review of Mark Twain's Lecture.--<br>
Respectfully Dedicated to those People who admire Gough<br>
and can't bear Independent Criticism.--</b></center>

<p>Mark Twain lectured at Institute Hall last evening. At an early
hour the intelligent, virtuous, high-minded, patriotic and
well-dressed people of this enterprising and lovely village might
have been seen wending their way to the Hall, &amp;c., &amp;c. The
Hall was well filled, all the seats that were occupied being
crowded. As Mr. Byron (whom some of our readers may remember
sometimes made up verses out of his head), once said, "the lamps
shone bright o'er fair women and brave men and all went merry as a
marriage bell." (Lest any one should take offense however, we
explain that the Hall was <i>not</i> lighted with "lamps" but with
gas, manufactured by our intelligent, efficient and high-minded Gas
Co. Bryon is to blame for the word "lamps" in this quotation, not
we. We hope this explanation will prevent the Gas Co. shutting off
our gas again, or any one else being offended and stopping his
paper.) The <i>elite</i> of this place was assembled, &amp;c.,
&amp;c. It is rarely seldom that so select an audience fills
Institute Hall. The lecturer no doubt felt highly honored and
flattered at his reception, &amp;c., &amp;c.</p>

<p>Of the lecture we need say nothing, &amp;c. Mr. Twain spoke for
himself, &amp;c. We only need say that it was fully up to
expectations, and exceeded the anticipations of the most sanguine
and skillful anticipatist in this section. While we do not wish to
wound by harsh criticism, we have no hesitation in saying and we
say it boldly that this lecture gave entire satisfaction to that
numerous class of our readers who like that kind of a lecture.
Still, we may be mistaken in this opinion and if so we are willing
to be corrected; we trust that like Mr. Heap we are "umble" and
would not venture to make so broad a declaration as the above
without offering to take it back if it did not prove satisfactory
to the intelligent readers of our widely-circulated and influential
J<font size="-1">OURNAL</font>.</p>

<p>We cannot better and less offensively sum up the merits of this
delightful, beautiful, eloquent, grand, extraordinary, lovely,
forcible, convincing, pious, exciting, splendid lecture than in the
one word with which the fascinating and fashionably-haired young
lady so fitly described Niagara Falls--<i>pretty</i>. It should
have been heard to be appreciated, &amp;c., &amp;c. Time and space
will not allow us to say anything about the lecture here and at
this time. We leave that disreputable task to the heartless wretch
who so audaciously refused to admire the transcendant merits of
Gough's temperance lecture and walk around. Those of our citizens
who did not attend missed a rare treat. (Lest our temperance
friends should be offended we explain that "treat" here does not
refer to anything ardent.) Mr. Twain entered fully into the spirit
of his performance. (Our readers who tie to spiritual
manifestations will take no offense at the word "spirit;" it is not
used in a supernatural sense.) To say this lecture was well
received is only the naked truth (no offense meant to our lady
readers by the term here applied to truth.) Mr. Twain's lecture
should be in every library, and on every centre table, and on every
faro table, and every bar, and in every livery stable, and in all
other places which deserve mention here; we hope we shall not be
deemed invidious in not naming them all.</p>

<p>We should be guilty of the blackest hearted ingratitude,
sacrilege, and inattention to a blessed institution did we neglect
to introduce in this connection a silver-plated puff on the Y. M.
C. A., and the managers of the lecture course. By bringing Mr.
Twain here they have conferred a great benefit on our people, have
given the prosperity of the place a substantial boost, have placed
us under renewed obligations to them, &amp;c., &amp;c. The citizens
will hold them in grateful memory and future generations will
inscribe their names</p>

<center>"Under the dome of the Union sky,<br>
The American soldier's temple of Fame.<br>
Along with the steed that saved the day<br>
By carrying Sheridan into the fight<br>
From Winchester--20 miles away."</center>

<p>[N. B.--The above is not entirely original--it is only impromptu
and poetry.]</p>

<hr width="50%">
<p>For the Journal.<br>
</p>

<center><b>Mark Twain Criticised--An Indignant
Spectator.--</b></center>

<p>Mr. Editor.--As your paper professes to allow free criticism, I
wish you would give me a chance to pitch into Mark Twain's lecture.
I was one of the victims. I confess I did not comprehend his
lecture, as I did not the subject announced on the bills. "Our
fellow cannibals!" Now what does that mean? Cannibals are men who
eat folks, ain't they? And if they are our fellows it means <i>
we</i> eat folks too, if I understand it correctly, don't it? Is
this true? If not it is a slander on the people of this great and
enlightened nation.</p>

<p>Starting out with a theme that either is a falsehood, or else
means nothing, the whole lecture was the same. He commenced by <i>
introducing himself</i>--an unusual procedure and I believe an
undeserved slight on the lecture committee who were present and
ready to introduce him.</p>

<p>And then he proceeded to his lecture--and what did it amount to?
What new or valuable thing did he tell us of the Sandwich Islands?
What that we could not read at home? He says he has been there, but
he must have used his senses to little purpose if he could not pick
up more interesting facts than he narrated in his lecture. His
intimation that <i>civilization</i> was responsible for the
decrease of population there is another insult to America. And what
sense is there in describing a man as being <i>dressed in an
umbrella?</i> Like a fool, he omitted to tell what the personal
costume of the Islander is, only saying that it wouldn't take more
than a minute to tell it; if it was so easy to tell why omit it?
Where is the sense in referring to a thing and then telling nothing
about it? Then, could there be anything more disgusting than his
talk about the baked dogs? Well enough, perhaps, to explain that
the Islanders eat dogs, but why dwell on it with such gusto when he
said himself that he had no appetite for the dish? Did he suppose
<i>we</i> had, that he talked so about it?</p>

<p>In equally bad taste was his reference to cannibalism. That
incident about the poor old sea-captain who was so barbarously
devoured was of course affecting, but why need he introduce it
without giving the <i>moral</i> to it--especially as he said he
told it only for the moral that was in it? Is it not an evidence of
Twain's excessive stupidity that he could tell that story, as he
confessed, forty or fifty times without once giving the moral to
it.</p>

<p>And I think every intelligent person in the audience must have
felt insulted, actually insulted, at his telling about a man being
blown up out of sight and gone fifteen minutes and coming down in
the very same identical spot and going to work again and the
company docking him for 15 minutes lost time, expecting us to
believe it. I consider the story preposterously unlikely. I don't
doubt a company being mean enough to dock him, but could any man go
up and come down again and go right to work without stopping to
rest? Even if the story is true, I don't see what it has to do with
the Sandwich Islands. You complain that our glorious Gough
introduced matter foreign to his subject and yet say nothing about
this unwarranted, absurd digression of Twain's. It makes a
difference whose ox is gored, I notice!</p>

<p>And what sense was there in the lecturer's offering to
illustrate cannibalism if any one would send up a baby to the
platform. He knew perfectly well that in such an advanced community
as this, infants are not allowed in the lecture room. And even if
they were, did he suppose any mother would send up her child for
such a purpose. It is a significant comment on this proposition
that, inhuman as it was, it was the <i>only part</i> of his lecture
that was <i>strictly relevant</i> to the subject; have your readers
thought of that? It reveals the only glimmer of sense there is in
the expression "our fellow-cannibals." Mr. Twain may be correct in
using that expression for himself, but not in including others in
the barbarous imputation, as he does when he uses the pronoun
"<i>our</i>." He should announce as his theme, "<i>My</i>
fellow-cannibals."</p>

<p>Another disgusting thing was the conceited manner and egotism of
the speaker. He seemed to think himself smart, &amp;c., and did not
hesitate to boldly hint that he thought so. If he has any friends
they should tell him what a silly appearance he makes.</p>

<p>And so I might go on, showing the irrelevancy and senselessness
of nearly all his lecture. It was entirely worthless. I never was
so disappointed in a performance in my life. I went there expecting
to hear something thrilling and original about those interesting
islands and this trash was all he had to offer. Some silly young
people laughed, though what they could see to laugh at I don't
know. I felt more like hiding my head in shame, disgust, annoyance,
chagrin and mortification. I could not help thinking of our noble
missionaries in those far-away Islands, and how pained they would
feel when they came to know that the field of their labors had been
so abominably and jestingly represented here.</p>

<p>Instead of joining you in the opinion that our Lecture Committee
has won fame by getting Mark Twain here to lecture, I declare that
they have offended the good taste and religious scruples of the
sober portion of this community by introducing his ill-timed levity
and in this opinion I am sustained by nine-tenths of that portion
of the community. I therefore enter a solemn protest against Mark
Twain, and in behalf of the serious portion of this community, sign
myself,</p>

<p>M<font size="-1">ANY</font> C<font size="-1">ITIZENS</font>.</p>

<p><a href="savsched.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align=
"left"></a></p>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="sandrev6">
<head>
<title>Cohoes Reviews Savages</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1870 Lecture Savages Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<h2><b><i>The Cohoes Cataract</i></b><br>
</h2>

<p>[<i>MT lectured in Cohoes, N.Y, Friday evening, 7 January 1870.
The local paper was a weekly that came on Saturdays, and gave only
this brief notice of the lecture the next day, January 8th:</i></p>

<p>M<font size="-1">ARK</font> T<font size="-1">WAIN'S</font>
L<font size="-1">ECTURE</font>.--Mark Twain (Samuel L. Clemens)
lectured in Egberts Hall, last evening, to a slim audience. Those
present were much pleased with his remarks, which were a mixture of
history and information with quaint humor. We regret that the Sons
of Temperance had so poor a return for their enterprise.</p>

<p><i>In its next issue the paper offered a full review.</i>]</p>

<center><img src="sandrev6.jpg" alt=
"The Cohoes Cataract, 15 January 1870"></center>

<center>
<h3>Mark Twain's Lecture.</h3>
</center>

We had not opportunity last week of speaking particularly of the
entertainment furnished by Mr. Twain in his lecture at Egberts'
Hall on Friday evening. It was altogether a novel production, so
different, in fact, from what people usually hear from the
platform, that the audience was somewhat disappointed; but quite
agreeably so, however, for all complained that the lecture was too
short, notwithstanding the speaker occupied a full hour in the
delivery of his queer, quaint and quizzical remarks. His
introduction of himself was remarkably Twain-ish and placed him and
his hearers upon good terms at once. He gave many interesting facts
concerning the Sandwich Islands, as well as funny incidents, and
droll experiences which were all jumbled together in a promiscuous
manner that was quite fascinating. From some of his best stories we
select the following which "brought down the house":

<p>He said that there was a sort of tradition or belief in the
Sandwich Islands, that every great and noted liar always brings up
there, in some time of his life. Of course, they stayed there for
good and did not come back delivering lectures. One of the greatest
of these was a man by the name of Morgan. After he died the natives
venerated his memory and recollected him with affection. Once when
he was asked if he had ever heard of the Natural Bridge of
Virginia, he answered. "Of course, didn't my father help to build
it?" Another time, when he was telling about a fast horse he once
owned, he said that, "In a thunder storm one day, he rode eighteen
miles without getting a drop of water on him, while his dog was
swimming along behind!"</p>

<p>One day, while the company were telling stories of mean men,
this Morgan capped the climax by telling about a corporation of
mean men. "This corporation were having some blasting done, and one
day, while one of the men was drilling away, he by chance struck a
spark, and the result was a premature blast which blew the man up
straight in the air. For a little while he appeared as large as a
man, then went up till he looked as large as a boy, then higher
till he looked like a doll, then till he looked as large as a bee,
and then out of sight. He soon came back again looking as large as
a bee, then down till he looked as large as a doll, nearer, till he
looked like a boy, then a man again, and came down with his crowbar
in precisely the same spot as before, and began drilling away. Now
this man was not gone more than fifteen minutes, and this
corporation of mean men <i>docked him for lost time!</i>"</p>

<p>We regret that so few were present at this and other lectures
given under the auspices of the Sons of Temperance and the "Grand
Army of the Republic." The gentlemen composing these associations
have, at great sacrifice of time and money, furnished our citizens
with quite as good a course of lectures as have been given in our
neighboring cities, yet we regret to say, they have as a whole,
been poorly patronized, and in many cases found fault with. Some
say, "why don't you get Beecher?" Others, "why don't you get Gough
or George W. Curtis?" We will answer for them. Mr. Beecher would
not come at any price, and the sum asked by Mr. Gough was entirely
beyond the possibility of raising even if the hall were filled at
fifty cents for each ticket, which, judging by past experience,
could not be done; for only a few seasons since, that celebrated
lecturer was advertised to speak in the M. E. Church, in behalf of
the temperance cause, at twenty-five cents admission, and the house
was not half filled,--a fact not at all creditable to our citizens.
George W. Curtis might be obtained if the people would come out;
but as in the case of Mr. Gough, the last time he appeared before a
Cohoes audience, the receipts failed to pay expenses, and the
association were compelled to make up the deficiency. This ought
not to be, for there is a sufficient number of intelligent people
in our large population to sustain one or even two courses of
lectures creditably, if not profitably to those who take the
trouble to secure them.</p>

<p>In closing, we will state that the Sons of temperance have
engaged George Francis Train, and the G. A. R. have made an
engagement with Dr. Hays, the celebrated Arctic explorer, and also
with Mr. J. Mines the editor of the Troy <i>Times</i>, to lecture
before our citizens in a short time, and we sincerely hope that
they may have an audience, not only commensurate with their
reputation and talents as lecturers, but that the associations
under whose auspices they are to appear, may, to some extent, at
least, be reimbursed for the losses they have sustained on former
occasions.</p>

<p><a href="savsched.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align=
"left"></a></p>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="sandrev7">
<head>
<title>Oswego Reviews Savages</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1870 Lecture Savages Eastern Favorable</keyword> -->
<center><img src="sandrev7.jpg" alt=
"Oswego Commercial Advertiser and Times, 17 January 1870"></center>

<p>T<font size="-1">WAIN'S</font> L<font size=
"-1">ECTURE.</font>--Mark Twain was greeted Saturday evening by an
audience that any man might be proud of. With a condition of
streets that under ordinary circumstances would keep people by
their firesides, Doolittle Hall was more completely filled than we
remember ever to have seen it before on the occasion of a lecture.
In fact, there was not sitting room enough, and the aisles were
pretty well filled with chairs and benches. Twain appeared pretty
punctually, attended by the chairman and a member of the lecture
committee, both of whom he unceremoniously dismissed from the stage
and took the programme into his own hands. After announcing the
next lecture of the course by Prof. Winchell, on the "Stone Folk,"
under which head, as Twain remarked, the Cardiff Giant is included,
Twain introduced himself in the following highly unique manner:</p>

<p><i>Ladies and Gentlemen</i>.--The <i>next</i> lecture of the
course will be delivered this evening by Samuel L. Clemens,
otherwise Mark Twain, a gentleman whose high character and
unimpeachable integrity are only equalled by his comeliness of
person and grace of manner. And I am the man. You will excuse me
for introducing myself, for I have just excused the chairman from
introducing me. I know it's not the ordinary way, but the fact is I
never yet have found a chairman of a lecture committee who was
equal to the task of introducing me as I ought to be
introduced."</p>

<p>This decidedly original introduction was greeted with shouts of
laughter and is a fair specimen of the vein in which the lecture on
"Our Fellow Savages of the Sandwich Islands" was delivered. It was
a good sample of his style of humor, and threw the audience into
frequent convulsions of laughter. Twain is a fair looking model of
humanity, and his manner is sufficient to provoke a smile. He talks
with great deliberation and brings out his words with a nasal
accent long drawn out which smacks of Yankeeism. Twain has roamed
over the world considerable, and wherever the ridiculous side of
human nature sticks out he has not failed to see and remember it.
He is a humorist in the radical sense of the word, and his wit
crystallizes around an atom of fun and makes it sparkle like a
diamond.</p>

<p>The lecture committee have given us two heavy lectures--Duryea's
and Tilton's--and Twain's was thrown in at just the right nick of
time to make the course rest a little easier on our stomachs, so to
speak--like the wine after dinner.</p>

<hr width="40%">
<p>[<i>This paper also published, the day before MT spoke, a
promotional squib and excerpts from three reviews of earlier
engagements in Boston and Hartford, under the heading</i> <a href=
"savnots.html">"Notices of the Press"</a>.]</p>

<a href="savsched.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="sandrev8">
<head>
<title>Troy Reviews Savages</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1870 Lecture Savages Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center><img src="sandrev8.jpg" alt=
"The Troy Daily Times, 12 January 1870"></center>

<center><b>MARK TWAIN.<br>
</b>
<hr width="30%">
<b>"Our Fellow Citizens of the Sandwich<br>
Islands."</b></center>

<p>Samuel L. Clemens, better known perhaps as Mark Twain, the
humorist, lectured in Union Place Hall, West Troy, last night upon
the above interesting topic. Mr. C. came hither under the auspices
of Roy steamer company, and was greeted with a full house. The
lecture gave a world of satisfaction. Those who went to laugh were
abundantly satisfied; those who went from any other cause must have
been likewise well pleased, for notwithstanding some things that
are repulsive about them no one can fail to like "our fellow
savages." Mr. Twain is a man about thirty-five or forty years of
age, somewhat tall and spare-built, and has the regular Western
knack of telling a story. Next Winter Mark must make his bow to a
Troy audience. We present a brief report of the lecture below:</p>

<p><i>Ladies and Gentlemen:</i>
The--next--lecture--in--this--course--will--be--delivered this
evening, by Samuel L. Clemens,--a gentleman--whose--high--character
and unimpeachable integrity--are only equalled by
his--comeliness--of--person--and--grace--of--manner.
And--I--am--the--man! You will excuse me for introducing myself,
for I have just excused the chairman from introducing me. The fact
is no chairman can introduce me as I ought to be introduced.
(Laughter.)</p>

<p>I come now to the Sandwich Islands, and shall tell the truth
about them as nearly as I can. If I do embellish with some nonsense
it is of no consequence. This nonsense is the ornamental barnacle
that clings to the oyster. As I was reared a good way from
tide-water, I don't really know whether the barnacle clings to the
oyster or not--but I do.</p>

<p>When Capt. Cook discovered these islands, though another man
came very near discovering them two weeks before, they contained
four hundred thousand souls. White men came and brought complicated
diseases, civilization, education and other calamities, and shortly
the natives began to die off with commendable zeal. Forty years ago
they were reduced to two hundred thousand, and by the last census
they had dwindled down to fifty-five thousand. It is proposed to
start a few more seminaries of learning and finish them off. It is
not education or civilization that is doing this--it is the
importation of disease. Owing to consumption and other reliable
diseases, the natives are retiring from business very fast. In
color the natives are a rich, dark brown--a sort of black and tan.
A very pleasing tint. The easy-going ways they have inherited from
their ancestors have made them idle, but not vicious. They are a
very excellent people. The native women wear a single, long, loose
garment. But the men don't. When there is a public ceremony the men
wear cotton umbrellas, or some little fancy article like that; but
further than this, they don't seem to have any inclination to
gorgeousness of attire. After speaking of the absolute sway of the
old-time kings, and the degradation of their subjects, the lecturer
spoke of the women.</p>

<p>Down at the bottom of all this degradation and misery came the
women. They were abject slaves--degraded to the ranks of brutes and
beasts. No better. They had no privileges. It was death for a woman
to eat at the table with her own husband. Death for her to eat of
the choice fruits. Even those poor debased savages had a notion of
what had come by woman's eating the forbidden fruit. By and by the
American missionaries broke the power of the chiefs, and lifted the
wives to an equality with the men. The missionaries set up schools
and taught them to read and write with facility, and there is not a
single ignorant person there now. They are the best educated people
in the world. I can testify to the zeal of the missionaries, and to
their faith and devotion. Still, all this work, extending over so
many years and costing so much, was carried on by Sunday school
children. We all took part in it. True, the system gave
opportunities to bad boys. Many a bad boy acquired the habit of
confiscating pennies of the missionary cause. But it is the
proudest reflection of my life that I never did that--at least not
more than once or twice.</p>

<p>The natives are very hospitable. They will give you a seat in
their cabin, and fresh fish, raw salt pork, baked dog, stewed cats,
and all the luxuries of the season. But when it comes to business
matters it is a different thing entirely--they will tell you one
falsehood after another--lies that will awe you with their
grandeur--that are stunning in sublimity. It doesn't discommode the
native in the least to do this. And he slides out of it with an
ease that is charming. Every one of them has half a dozen mothers.
I don't mean to say natural mothers, but adopted ones. They have a
custom of calling any woman "mother" that they have taken a fancy
to. You see at once that a native may have one hundred and fifty
mothers. This custom breeds some curious incidents. A California
gentleman who owned a sugar plantation hired one of these natives
to work for him in the busy season. He soon came to ask leave to
bury his mother. Shortly after he came again with the same request.
"I thought you buried her last week," said the gentleman. "This is
another one," said the native. "All right," said the gentleman, "go
and plant her." After a few more such requests the planter said
that he thought that his stock of mothers held out pretty well, and
told him to clear out and not come back again till he had buried
every mother he had in the world.</p>

<p>The natives of these islands are very fond of dogs. Not the
magnificent Newfoundlands nor the graceful greyhound--but
insignificant curs that a white man would despise. There is not a
handsome feature about them unless it is their tail. And there is
nothing extraordinary about that. A friend of mine said that if he
owned one he would cut his tail off and throw the balance of the
dog away. But the natives love these pups--they feed them from
their own hands, sleep with them, pet them, till they have grown to
mature doghood, and then eat them. Now I couldn't do that. I would
rather go hungry two days than devour an old personal friend. A
native of these islands will eat anything that he can bite. They
will take a fresh fish right out of the water and eat him. Of
course it is inconvenient to the fish, but the native enjoys it. It
used to be a popular belief that these islanders were cannibals.
But cannibalism never existed there, except in one instance. And
this cannibal was a foreigner who opened an office there and ate a
good many of the natives. He did a large business in this line. In
other cities, at this point in my discourse, it is my custom to
illustrate cannibalism. But being a stranger here I don't feel at
liberty to ask favors. Still, if any one in the audience would lend
me an infant. [Laughter.] However, it doesn't matter. I know that
little children have grown scarce and high, on account of neglect
and inattention since the woman movement set in.</p>

<p>Well, as I say, the cannibal opened his establishment there, but
they say that by and by he got tired of his diet. Well, anybody
would. So he thought he would like to try and see how a white man
would go--and so he lay in wait, and captured a venerable
whaling-ship captain, sixty-five years in the service. The cannibal
did the best he could, but it was the worst thing he ever did. Of
course, he could no more digest that old whaler than a keg of
nails. He suffered. There is no telling how much he suffered, with
this sin on his conscience and the whaler on his stomach. He
lingered for a few days, and then died. Let this be a warning to
you. I don't know myself why it should be a warning to you, but I
notice that when other lecturers mention a historical fact they do
not believe in themselves, they always back it up with a moral.</p>

<p>With all their kindly ways these people practice some cruelties.
They will put a live chicken into hot ashes simply to see it hop
about. They would burn the flesh before the missionaries came, and
would put out an eye, or a tooth, when a chief died. And if their
grief was deep, and they could get relief in no other way, they
would go out and scalp a neighbor. In the season of mourning for a
great person they permit any crime that will best express great
sorrow.</p>

<p>They do everything differently from other people. They mount a
horse from the off side. They turn to the left instead of the
right. They say the same words for "good bye" and "how do you do."
They always, in beckoning for you to come, motion in the opposite
direction. Even the birds partake of this peculiarity. The native
duck lives four thousand feet above the level of the sea, and never
sees water except when it rains. They (the islanders) grown in a
heart-broken way when they are particularly happy. They have some
customs we might import to advantage. I don't call any to mind just
now.</p>

<p>In Honolulu, they are the most easy-going people in the world.
Some of our people are not acquainted with their customs. They
started a gas company once, and put the gas at $13 a thousand feet.
They only took in $16 the first month. They all went to bed at
dark. They are an excellent people. I speak earnestly. They do not
even know the name of some of the vices in this country. A lady
called on a doctor. She wanted something for general debility. He
ordered her to drink porter. She called him again. The porter had
done her no good. He asked her how much porter she had taken. She
said a tablespoonful in a tumbler of water. I wish we could import
such a blessed ignorance into this country. There are low white
people in Hawaii who would drink liquors if they could get them.
They drink kerosene, aqua fortis, hair oil, turpentine. They do say
that the whole population got terrifically drunk on the Fourth of
July on a barrel of Mrs. Winslow's soothing syrup.</p>

<p>The islands are delightful, because they are in the tropics. The
thermometer doesn't change more than 12 degrees in twelve months.
It stands at about 70 the year round. You can have any climate you
want. Mountains that rise to a prodigious height, with eternal
snows on the tops. And as you come down you go through the climates
of all the zones, and have the vegetation of all the climes.</p>

<p>I must mention one feature of the place before I close. It would
not be proper to close without speaking of it. The white people
there have a tradition that all the supremely gifted liars in the
world are confined to the Sandwich Islands. They say that a man
named Morgan there will never permit anybody to beat him in telling
a story. When asked if he had heard of the Natural Bridge,
Virginia, he said of course he had, his father helped to build it.
He had the fastest horse in the world, and in a thunder shower once
he ran him eighteen miles and not a single drop of water touched
him, while he dog was swimming all the way behind the wagon. He
told of a company he belonged to in California who hired one fellow
to blast some rock. Owing to carelessness there was an explosion,
and this fellow was blown up in the air till he didn't look any
larger than a little boy--then he looked no larger than a dog--then
no larger than a bird--finally than a bee. And then he began to
descend, and increased in size from a bee to a bird--and a dog--and
a boy--and finally to a full-sized man--coming down in exactly the
same spot where he went up, and began to blast rock immediately on
landing. Morgan said that fellow was gone only fifteen minutes, and
yet they docked him for lost time.</p>

<p>The lecturer here closed his address by thanking his audience
for their attention and wishing them a very pleasant good
night.</p>

<br>
<a href="savsched.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="sandrev9">
<head>
<title>Albany Reviews Savages</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1870 Lecture Savages Eastern Favorable </keyword> --><font
size="+1">From the Albany <i>Argus</i>,<br>
11 January 1870</font><br>
<br>


<p>Mark Twain is, to our taste, and in our judgment, the best
humorist now before the public. His humor is in the idea, and not
in the mere use or misuse of words and phrases, which unfortunately
seem to constitute the sole resort of most of the so-called
humorists of the day. In genuine fun, both in the idea and in the
setting, Mark Twain is immeasurably in advance of "Nasby," "Josh
Billings" and the whole miscellaneous tribe of bad spellers and
verbal contortionists who assume to play a funny part among the
ephemera of literature. The very "Petroleum" of Nasby is affected,
and his peculiarities give zest rather to partisan politics than to
the multitude. "Josh Billings" has a deal of humor but both he and
Nasby shroud themselves in a mystery of infamous orthography, which
becomes tiresome and even painful in a short time, and makes us
turn with unmindful satisfaction to the natural and occasionally
most singular humor of Twain. . . . "Artemus Ward" in his well
known lecture on "Babes in the Woods," made a point of constantly
avoiding his subject. "Mark Twain" does nothing of the kind. His
lecture with the fun out, would make a telling and accurate sketch
of the Sandwich Islands and the natives thereof; but with the fun
in, it is a lecture that both amuses and instructs.</p>

<p>[Source: Walter Frear's <i>Mark Twain and Hawaii</i>, Appendix
D3.]</p>

<a href="savsched.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="sandrv10">
<head>
<title>Providence Press Reviews Savages</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1869 Lecture Savages Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center><img src="sandrv10.jpg" alt=
"Providence Evening Press, 10 November 1869"></center>

<center><i>MARK TWAIN'S LECTURE.</i><br>
<hr width="40%">
<font size="-1">"OUR FELLOW SAVAGES IN THE SANDWICH<br>
ISLANDS."</font></center>

<p>The second lecture of the Franklin Lyceum course was delivered
last evening, at Harrington's Opera House, by Samuel L. Clemens, of
the Buffalo <i>Express</i>, familiarly known as "Mark Twain." We
give the following extracts:</p>

<p>Unfortunately, the first object I ever saw in the Sandwich
Islands was a repulsive one. It was a case of Oriental leprosy, of
so dreadful a nature that I have never been able to get it out of
my mind since. I don't intend that it shall give a disagreeable
complexion to this lecture at all, but inasmuch as it was the first
thing I saw in those islands, it naturally suggested itself first
when I proposed to talk about the islands. It is a very hard matter
to get a disagreeable object out of one's memory. I discovered that
a good while ago. A year or two ago, in one of the great cathedrals
in Milan, they showed me a great many curiosities, very
interesting, but they all faded out of my memory except just the
one thing, and that was an unpleasant one. It was a curious ancient
piece of statuary. They don't know where it came from, or who made
it; they only know they have had it some five hundred years; but
they imagine it must have come from Phidias, because they suppose
no other artist could have copied human nature with such faultless
accuracy of touch. It is the figure of a man without a skin -- the
figure of a freshly skinned man. Every fibre, tendon and tissue of
the human frame was represented in minutest detail. It was the
heaviest thing, and yet there was something fascinating about it.
It looked so natural; it looked as if it was in pain, and you know
a freshly skinned man would naturally look that way. He would
unless his attention was occupied with some other matter. It was a
dreadful object, and I have been sorry many a time since that I
ever saw that man. Sometimes I dream of him, sometimes he is
standing by my bedpost, sometimes he is stretched between the
sheets, touching me -- the most uncomfortable bedfellow I ever
had.</p>

<p>One memory of a repulsive object leads to another, and that to
another, and so on until I finally come down to my lecture on the
Sandwich Islands. Now if an impression has gotten abroad in the
land that the Sandwich Islands are in South America, that is the
error I wish to attack; that is the error which I wish to combat. I
wish to remove it from your minds. These islands are situated some
twenty-one hundred miles southwest from San Francisco, but why they
were put so far away in such an inconvenient locality is probably
none of our business, and we won't discuss that question at all.
The islands are a dozen in number, and their entire area is not
greater I suppose than that of Rhode Island and Connecticut
combined. They are of volcanic origin, of volcanic construction I
should say. They are composed of lava, harder than any statement I
have made in fifteen years. There is not a spoonful of legitimate
dirt in the whole group, unless it has been imported. These islands
were discovered some eighty or ninety years ago by Captain Cook,
though another man came very near discovering them before, and he
was diverted out of his course by suggestions he got out of a
bottle. He wasn't the first man who has been degraded by
suggestions got out of a bottle.</p>

<p>The natives of the Sandwich Islands of color are a rich dark
brown, a kind of black and tan. The tropical sun and the easy-going
ways inherited from their ancestors, have made them rather idle,
but they are not vicious at all, they are good people. The native
women in the rural districts wear a single long loose garment. Men
don't. When the weather is inclement, men wear cotton in their ears
-- some little fancy article like that -- further than this they
have no inclination towards gorgeousness of costume. In ancient
times the King was ruler of all the land, and supreme head of the
church and State; his voice was superior to all law; he was
absolute; his power was sacred. After the King in authority came
the high priests of the ancient superstition, and after them the
great chiefs, little better than slaves to the King. Next came the
common plebians, and they were slaves to the whole party, were
abused and killed at the slightest pretext. And below them, away
down at the bottom of this pile of tyranny and superstition, came
the women, and they were the abject slaves of all; they were
degraded to the level of the beasts, and thought to be no better.
They were cruelly maltreated. By the law of the land it was death
for a woman to eat at table with her husband, or to eat out of the
same dish with him. Even those darkened people seemed to have a
glimmering idea of the danger of women eating forbidden fruit, and
they didn't want to take the risk.</p>

<p>Now the Sandwich Islanders are the best educated of any people
on the earth. And all this wonderful work was accomplishedby our
American missionaries. And what is curious further, this great work
was paid for in great part by the American Sunday School children
with their pennies. Though it is beyond all doubt that many a bad
little boy has reaped a lucrative income, by confiscating the
pennies given him for missionary contributions. It is the proudest
reflection of my life that I hever did that -- never did it more
than once or twice, anyhow.</p>

<p>These natives are an exceedingly hospitable people, if I haven't
lost my place. If you want to stay two or three days and nights in
a native cabin you will be welcome. They will feast you on raw
fish, with the scales on, cocoanuts, plantains, baked dogs and
fricasseed cats, all the luxuries of the season. But if you want to
trade with one of them, that's business. He will tell one falsehood
after another, right straight along, and not ordinary lies either,
but monstrous incredible ones; and when a native is caught in a lie
it doesn't discommode him at all. All these natives have a dozen
mothers at least, not natural mothers, but adopted ones. They are
very fond of dogs, these people; not the great Newfoundland or the
stately mastiff, but a species of little mean, contemptible cur,
that a white man would condemn to death on general principles.
There is nothing attractive about those dogs, there is not a
handsome feature about them, unless it is their bushy tails. A
friend of mine said if he had one of those dogs he would cut off
its tail and throw the rest of the dog away. They feed this dog,
pet him, take ever so much care of him, and then cook and eat him.
I couldn't do that. I would rather go hungry for two days than
devour an old personal friend in that way.</p>

<p>The ladies of the Sandwich Islands have a great many pleasant
customs which I don't know but we might practice with profit here.
You never see two of those ladies rush together and kiss each other
and then go away and talk about each other behind their backs. I
don't suppose our ladies do it, but they might. But I believe I am
getting on dangerous ground. I won't pursue that any further.</p>

<p>The climate of these Islands is delightful, it is beautiful. In
Honolulu the thermometer stands at about 80 or 82 degrees pretty
much all the year round -- don't change more than 12 degrees in
twelve months. In the sugar districts the thermometer stands at 70
and does not change at all. Any kind of thermometer will do -- one
without any quicksilver is just as good. The climate is very
healthy. A man told me it was so hot in New York a little while ago
that <i>gold</i> went up to 160 in the shade.</p>

<p>There are about three thousand white people in the islands; they
are mostly Americans. In fact they are the kings of the Sandwich
Islands, the monarchy is not much more than a mere name. These
people stand as high in the scale of character as any people in the
world, and some of them who were born and educated in those islands
don't even know what vice is.</p>

<p>George Vandenhoff, Esq., is to read before the Lyceum, on
Wednesday evening of next week.</p>

<br>
<a href="savsched.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="sandrv11">
<head>
<title>Poughkeepsie Eagle Reviews Savages</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1869 Lecture Savages Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->[<i>
From the</i> Poughkeepsie Daily Eagle<i>, 2 December 1869:</i>]<br>
<br>
<p>L<font size="-1">YCEUM</font>. -- Mark Twain (Samuel L. Clemens)
will lecture before the Lyceum, on Friday evening of this week.
This is "Mark's" first appearance in our city. We would advise all
who can appreciate sparkling wit and genial humor, to provide
themselves with a ticket and wend their way to Collingwood's Opera
House, on Friday evening, nothing fearing that they will receive an
adequate return from their investment.</p>

<hr width="25%">
<br>
<center><img src="sandrv11.jpg" alt=
"Poughkeepsie Daily Eagle, 4 December 1869"></center>

<p>M<font size="-1">ARK</font> T<font size="-1">WAIN</font>. --
There was a fine audience at Collingwood Opera House last evening,
the occasion being a lecture on the Sandwich Islands by Mark Twain.
-- There was much original humor in the lecturer, and too at times
he gave splendid illustrations of natural scenery on that far off
land. It was a very enjoyable entertainment, and every one in the
audience seemed pleased.</p>

<br>
<a href="savsched.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="satrev">
<head>
<title>Saturday Review Reviews Innocents</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1870 British Mixed </keyword>-->
<center>
<h2>Saturday Review [British; unsigned]<br>
1870: October 8</h2>
</center>

<p>Every traveller on the Continent has met the American tourist,
and formed some opinion of his merits. We do not speak of that
variety of American who comes over to spend five or six years in
Europe and finds himself rather more at home on the Parisian
boulevards than on the New York Broadway. Nor do we refer to the
Americans who have been too highly cultivated to obtrude their
national peculiarities upon us in any disagreeable form. There is
no pleasanter acquaintance than the gentleman, or still more the
lady, of this class who has just enough American flavour to be
amusingly original. But, besides these types, the United States are
kind enough to provide us with a vast number of travellers
corresponding in refinement and intelligence to Mr. Cook's
tourists. They are the people who do Europe in six weeks, and throw
in the Holy Land and Egypt to fill up their spare time. They are
gloriously ignorant of any language but their own, supremely
contemptuous of every country that had no interest in thc
Declaration of Independence, and occasionally, it must be admitted,
as offensive as the worst kind of Cockney tourist, whilst even less
inclined to hide their light under a bushel. Comparing them with
the most nearly analogous class of British travellers, it is rather
hard to determine which should have the preference. The American is
generally the noisier and more actively disagreeable, but, on the
other hand, he often partly redeems his absurdity by a certain
naivete and half-conscious humour. He is often laughing in his
sleeve at his own preposterous brags, and does not take himself
quite so seriously as his British rival. He is vulgar, and even
ostentatiously and atrociously vulgar; but the vulgarity is mixed
with a real shrewdness which rescues it from simple insipidity. We
laugh at him, and we would rather not have too much of his company;
but we do not feel altogether safe in despising him. We may save
ourselves the trouble of any further attempts at description by
quoting a few illustrative passages from the book before us. Mr.
Mark Twain, as the author chooses to call himself, is a Californian
humourist after the fashion of Artemus Ward. He came to Europe on a
grand excursion trip, and describes his impressions of France and
Italy in the true tourist style. He parades his utter ignorance of
Continental languages and manners, and expresses his very original
judgments on various wonders of art and nature with a praiseworthy
frankness. We are sometimes left in doubt whether he is speaking in
all sincerity, or whether he is having a sly laugh at himself and
his readers. To do him justice, however, we must observe that he
has a strong tinge of the peculiar national humour; and, though not
equal to the best performers on the same instrument, manages to be
an amusing representative of his class. The dry joke, which apes
seriousness, is a favourite device of his countrymen; and Mr. Mark
Twain is of course not as simple as he affects to be. We merely say
this to guard ourselves against the imputation of taking a
professional jester seriously; but, whether he speaks in downright
earnest or with a half-concealed twinkle of the eye, his remarks
will serve equally well as an illustration of the genuine
unmistakable convictions of many of his countrymen.</p>

<p>Without further preface we will quote some of Mr. Twain's
remarks upon foreign countries. And, first of all, he exhibits that
charming ignorance of all languages but English which is so common
amongst his fellows. French newspapers, he tells us, "have a
strange fashion of telling a perfectly straight story till you get
to the nub' of it, and then a word drops in that no man can
translate, and that story is ruined." He is seriously aggrieved by
the names of places, and says that the nearest approach which
anybody can make to the true pronunciation of Dijon is "demijohn."
The spelling is not much assistance under such circumstances.
Speaking of a certain distinguished artist, he observes, "they
spell it Vinci, and pronounce it Vinchy; foreigners always spell
better than they pronounce." Gentlemen who labour under this
difficulty of communicating with the natives naturally fall into
the hands of guides, and Mr. Twain and his friends appear to have
suffered terribly from the persons whom they hired to take them to
the sights of foreign towns. Their system on arriving at any large
place was to engage a <i>valet de place,</i> whom they always
called "Ferguson," to save the trouble of pronouncing a new name,
and were carried about as helpless victims to such places as he
preferred, besides having to swallow his stories. They took a
characteristic revenge, which appears to have afforded them immense
satisfaction. The way to bully your guide is to affect a profound
ignorance -- if you have not got it naturally -- and a stony
indifference to his information. They therefore told off a
gentleman called the Doctor, to ask questions of the said guide,
because he could "look more like an inspired idiot, and throw more
imbecility into the tone of his voice, than any man that lives. It
comes natural to him." Thus, for example, it was assumed that as
Americans they would take a special interest in an autograph letter
of Columbus. The Doctor, after asking some irrelevant questions,
pronounced it the worst specimen of handwriting he ever saw, and
added, "If you have got any specimens of penmanship of real merit,
trot them out; and, if you haven't, drive on." The guide, we are
told, was "considerably shaken up." On the same principle, when
shown an Egyptian monument, the Doctor asked indignantly, "What is
the use of imposing your vile secondhand carcases on us? If you've
got a nice fresh corpse, fetch him out! or, by George, we'll brain
you." The most irritating question you can put to such a guide is
to ask concerning any distinguished character to whom he refers --
such, for example, as Columbus or Michael Angelo -- "Is he dead?"
And this seems to have met with such success that Mr. Twain
scarcely restrained his companions from putting the inquiry to a
monk in a Capuchin convent, who showed them some of the personal
remains of his predecessors.</p>

<p>We may imagine the temper in which some of the remarkable sights
of the Old World would be contemplated under such circumstances.
Mr. Twain, indeed, was much impressed by the cathedral at Milan.
The bill for mere workmanship, he says, "foots up six hundred and
eighty-four millions of francs, thus far (considerably over a
hundred millions of dollars), and it is estimated that it will take
a hundred and twenty years yet to finish the cathedral." When he
gets to St. Peter's, however, he declares that it did not look
nearly so large as the capitol at Washington, and certainly not a
twentieth part as beautiful from the outside. Even natural wonders
are generally surpassed by their rivals in the United States. The
Lake of Como, for example, is pronounced to be very inferior to
Lake Tahoe. In clearness it is not to be compared to it. "I speak,"
he says, "of the north shore of Lake Tahoe, where we can count the
scales on a trout at a depth of 180 feet." Mr. Twain, however,
feels constrained to add, "I have tried to get this statement off
at par here, but with no success; so I have been obliged to
negotiate it at fifty per cent. discount." Tahoe, we may explain in
passing, for the benefit of philological readers, is Indian for
grasshopper soup -- so, at least, Mr. Twain believes. The objects,
however, against which Mr. Twain feels a special indignation, to
which he tells us he is bound to give vent in spite of the
remonstrances of his friends, are pictures by the old masters. The
old masters irritate him incessantly; and the apparent reason of
his objection is characteristic. "Wherever you find a Raphael, a
Rubens, a Michael Angelo, &amp;c.," he says, "you find artists
copying them, and the copies are always the handsomest. Maybe the
originals were handsome when they were new, but they are not now."
He "harbours no animosity" against the deluded persons who think
otherwise; but he regards them as about as wise as men who should
stand opposite a desert of charred stumps and say, What a noble
forest! Michael Angelo appears to have been a special annoyance to
him. "I never felt so fervently thankful," he exclaims, "so
soothed, so tranquil, so filled with a blessed peace, as I did
yesterday, when I leamt that Michael Angelo was dead." One would
rather like to know how many of Mr. Cook's tourists share this
feeling in their hearts, if they only dared to avow their ignorance
with an equally touching frankness. Mr. Twain took his revenge by
asking the wretched "Ferguson" of the moment, whenever he came to a
"statoo brunzo" (Italian for a bronze statue), or an Egyptian
obelisk, or the Forum or any other work of art, ancient or modern,
whether it too was by Michael Angelo; thus at any rate making
somebody else share in his tortures. In presence of the ancients he
generally indulges in facetiousness of a rather low order. He goes,
for example, to some amphitheatre and tries to realize the scene
which it once presented. His most vivid picture is that of a Roman
youth, who took "some other fellow's young lady" to a gladiatorial
show and amused her and himself during the acts by "approaching the
cage and stirring up the martyrs with his whalebone cane." But, to
say the truth, Mr. Twain here verges upon buffoonery. Once or twice
he is driven to what is happily described in the heading of the
page as "general execration." Here, for example, is a burst of
patriotic eloquence. "O, sons of classic Italy, is the spirit of
enterprise, of self-reliance, of noble endeavour utterly dead
within ye? Curse your indolent worthlessness, why don't you rob
your Church?" And he is very great on occasion in explaining the
many advantages of a free and independent Republic as compared with
a land groaning under priestly dominion and grovelling
superstition. That notion of robbing the Church occurs to him very
forcibly at intervals, and he seems to think that, so far as the
plan has been carried out, it is the best chance for Italy.</p>

<p>Perhaps we have persuaded our readers by this time that Mr.
Twain is a very offensive specimen of the vulgarest kind of Yankee.
And yet, to say the truth, we have a kind of liking for him. There
is a frankness and originality about his remarks which is
pleasanter than the mere repetition of stale raptures; and his fun,
if not very refined, is often tolerable in its way. In short, his
pages may be turned over with amusement, as exhibiting more or less
consciously a very lively portrait of the uncultivated American
tourist, who may be more obtrusive and misjudging, but is not quite
so stupidly unobservant as our native product. We should not choose
either of them for our companions on a visit to a church or a
picture-gallery, but we should expect most amusement from the
Yankee as long as we could stand him.</p>

<a href="iarevhpg.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="galaxy.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="sfbull">
<head>
<title>Evening Bulletin Reviews Huck</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 American Western Mixed  </keyword> -->
<h2><i>San Francisco Evening Bulletin</i>[unsigned]<br>
1885: March 14</h2>

<br>


<center>
<table border="0" width="650" cellpadding="5">
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
<p>Mark Twain long since learned the art of writing for the market.
His recent books have the character of commercial ventures. He
probably estimates in advance his profits. His books are not sold
to any great extent over the counters of booksellers, but are
circulated by subscription agents. Lately Mark Twain, it is
reported, has become the silent partner in a publishing house, the
imprint of which is on the present volume. Those who read "Tom
Sawyer" and like it will probably read "Huckleberry Finn," and like
it in a less degree. No book has been put on the market with more
advertising. When Mark Twain represented "Tom Sawyer" as getting a
job of free white-washing done by his cronies, because there was
fun in it, and only just enough to go around, he disclosed his own
tactics in the matter of free advertising. When it was given out
that some one had tampered with the engravings in the printing
office, in a mysterious way, that accounted for the delay in
bringing out the book, it secured at the same time many thousand
dollars' worth of free advertising. Then the <i>Century</i> gave
the enterprise a lift by publishing a chapter of the book in
advance, which, while an advertisement, was still a readable
article. "Huckleberry Finn" has been introduced to the world as it
were with the blare of trumpets. It comes also with this warning:
"Persons attempting to find a motive in this narrative will be
prosecuted; persons attempting to find a moral in it will be
banished; persons attempting to find a plot in it will be shot." So
then there is neither motive, moral, nor plot. But there still
remain one hundred and seventy-four wood cuts, which, according to
the view of the author, ought to be liberally peppered through the
volume. Many of the designs are drawn with spirit, and are all
executed well enough for the plan of the book.</p>

<p>The tone of the volume is indicated in the opening
paragraphs:</p>

<br>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td valign="top"><br>
<center><a href="hfquots.html#d"><img src="../twnlnk.GIF" border=
"0"></a></center>
</td>
<td>
<p><a name="a">You don't</a> know me, without you have read a book
by the name of "The Adventures of 'Tom Sawyer,' " but that ain't no
matter. That book was made by Mr. Mark Twain, and he told the truth
mainly. There were things which he stretched, but mainly he told
the truth. That is nothing. I never seen anybody but lied, one time
or another, without it was "Aunt Polly" or the widow, or maybe
"Mary." "Aunt Polly"--Tom's "Aunt Polly," she is--and "Mary," and
the "widow Douglas," is all told about in that book, which is
mostly a true book; with stretchers, as I said before.</p>

<br>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
<p>The author starts out by telling his juvenile readers that there
are some lies in his book--that most people lie, and that it is not
very bad after all. Of course the warning is timely that persons
attempting to seek a moral in the story should be banished.</p>

<br>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td valign="top"><br>
<center><a href="hfquots.html#e"><img src="../twnlnk.GIF" border=
"0"></a></center>
</td>
<td>
<p>Now the way the book winds up is this: "Tom" and me found the
money that the robbers hid in the cave, and it made us rich. We got
$6,000 a piece--all gold. It was an awful sight of money when it
was piled up. Well, "Judge Thatcher," he took it and put it out at
interest, and it fetched us a dollar a day apiece all the year
round--more than a body could tell what to do with. The "widow
Douglas," she took me for her son, and allowed she would sivilize
me; but it was rough living in the house all the time, considering
how dismal, regular and decent the widow was in all her ways; and
so, when I could stand it no longer, I lit out. I got into my old
rags and my sugar hogshead again, and was free and satisfied. But
"Tom Sawyer," he hunted me up and said he was going to start a band
of robbers, and I might join if I would go back to the widow and be
respectable. So I went back.</p>

<br>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
<p>It is an amusing story if such scrap-work can be called a story.
The author rarely fails when he sets out to tickle the ribs of
young or old. There is so little genuine wit in the world, that the
little must be made to go a great way. Mark Twain has the genuine
vein; it nearly pinches out here and there, and in many places it
is hardly an inch wide by miners' measurement. The funny book will
always be read in this world of dryness and dearth. Many fastidious
people hide their scruples, because they want to be amused. Comedy
pays better than tragedy. The author contrives to puncture a great
many shams. His satire in this respect, even when he declares that
it is aimless, is directed with a purpose. Whether young people who
read this volume will be the better for it will be an open
question. Here is another paragraph where the warning not to seek
for a moral might be applicable:</p>

<br>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td valign="top"><br>
<center><a href="hfquots.html#f"><img src="../twnlnk.GIF" border=
"0"></a></center>
</td>
<td>
<p>Every night, now I used to slip ashore, towards 10 o'clock, at
some little village, and buy ten or fifteen cents' worth of meal,
or bacon, or other stuff to eat, and sometimes I lifted a chicken
that warn't roosting comfortable, and took him along. Pap always
said, take a chicken when you get a chance, because if you don't
want him yourself you can easy find somebody that does, and a good
deed ain't ever forgot. I never see pap when he didn't want the
chicken himself, but that is what he used to say, anyway.</p>

<br>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
<p>The author turns his knowledge of Western dialects to account.
Mississippi river scenes and associations are always available. The
art of book-making from Twain's point of view is well illustrated
here. He is alive always to the fact that young people will not
read a dull book. He never makes a dull one. There is very little
of literary art in the story. It is a string of incidents
ingeniously fastened together. The spice of juvenile wickedness and
dare-deviltry give a zest to the book. "Huckleberry Finn" is, in a
restricted sense, a typical character. Yet the type is not
altogether desirable, nor is it one that most parents who want a
future of promise for their young folks would select without some
hesitation. The trouble with "Tom Sawyer" and "Huckleberry Finn" is
not that they are too good for this world; even as the world goes,
they are not good enough. Beyond the recognition that there is a
great deal of "fun," as boys would put the case, it must also be
admitted that not a little of the "assisted wit" is of the more
dreary sort, as if the author was subjected to a pretty hard strain
at times to work his facetious vein. The book is attractive enough
to command commercial success, and that, it may be supposed, was
the inspiring motive in its production.</p>

<p>Charles L. Webster &amp; Co., publishers, New York. For sale by
the Occidental Publishing Company, sole agents.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<a href="hucrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="sfchron.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="sfchron">
<head>
<title>Chronicle Reviews Huck</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 American Western Favorable  </keyword> -->

<h2><i>The San Francisco Chronicle</i> [unsigned]<br>
1885: March 15</h2>

<br>


<center>
<table border="0" width="650" cellpadding="5">
<tr>
<td>
<center><img src="../margin.GIF"></center>
</td>
<td>
<p>"The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" must be pronounced the most
amusing book Mark Twain has written for years. It is a more minute
and faithful picture of Southwestern manners and customs fifty
years ago than was "Life on the Mississippi," while in regard to
the dialect it surpasses any of the author's previous stories in
the command of the half-dozen species of patois which passed for
the English language in old Missouri. Mark Twain may be called the
Edison of our literature. There is no limit to his inventive
genius, and the best proof of its range and originality is found in
this book, in which the reader's interest is so strongly enlisted
in the fortunes of two boys and a runaway negro that he follows
their adventures with keen curiosity, although his common sense
tells him that the incidents are as absurd and fantastic in many
was as the "Arabian Nights." Here is where the genius and the human
nature of the author come in. Nothing else can explain such a <i>
tour de force</i> as this, in which the most unlikely materials are
transmuted into a work of literary art. The plot is extremely
simple. Huckleberry Finn, who appeared incidentally in the
veracious adventuers of Tom Sawyer, concludes to go down the
Mississippi to get rid of his drunken father. He falls in with a
runaway negro, and the book is given up to the adventures of this
couple on a raft on the river, re-enforced by two sharpers known as
the Duke and the King, and afterward by Tom Sawyer. In many parts
of the book, but especially at the outset, some of the
conversations are unnecessarily spun out, on the style of the elder
Dumas when he was writing at so much the word, but when the story
gets under good headway it is remarkably well proportioned, and the
interest is never allowed to flag for a moment. The very best
episodes are those which detail the swindling schemes of the two
river sharpers, who impose upon Huckleberry and the negro by
declaring that they are scions of royalty. These chapters were
printed in the <i>Century</i> under the title of "Royalty on the
Mississippi," but they left the fate of the two heroes in doubt, so
that most readers of the performances of the "Royal Nonesuch," and
the personation of the two brothers from England will want to know
what was the final result of their schemes.</p>

<p>The incidental descriptions of character are always good. Take,
for instance, this small picture of Huck's father--a typical Pike
county drunkard:</p>

<br>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td valign="top"><br>
<center><a href="hfquots.html#g"><img src="../twnlnk.GIF" border=
"0"></a></center>
</td>
<td>
<p>He was most 50, and he looked it. His hair was long and tangled
and greasy and hung down, and you could see his eyes shining
through it like he was behind vines. It was all black, no gray; so
was his long, mixed-up whiskers. There warn't no colorin his face,
where his face showed--it was white; not like another man's white,
but a white to make a body sick, a whote to make a body's flesh
crawl--a tree-toad white, a fish-belly white. As for his
clothes--just rags, that was all.</p>

<br>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
<p>On the raft, while floating down the Mississippi, Huck has an
excellent opportunity to exercise his gift for lying. This is
simply phenomenal. The boy enjoys mendacity; he lies for the mere
lust of lying, and the ingenuity with which he piles one fiction on
top of another will excite the reader's wonder and admiration. Just
before the runaways get fairly started, Huck visits a neighboring
town to get information and encounters a farmer's wife. He is
dressed up in an old calico gown and pretends to be a girl
searching for her relations. The woman suspects his sex and tries
various devices to ascertain if her suspicions are true. Among
these is threading a needle and throwing a bar of lead at the rats
which swarm around the house. Finally she makes Huck own up that he
is a boy, and then gives him this sound advice in regard to
personating a girl:</p>

<br>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td valign="top"><br>
<center><a href="hfquots.html#h"><img src="../twnlnk.GIF" border=
"0"></a></center>
</td>
<td>
<p>"Don't you go about women in that old calico. You do a girl
tolerable poor, but you might fool men, maybe. Bless you, child,
when you set out to thread a needle, don't hold the thread still
and fetch the needle up to it. Hold the needle still and poke the
thread at it--that's the way a woman most always does, but a man
always does 'tother way. And when you throw at a rat or anything
hitch yourself up a-tiptoe and fetch your hand up over your head as
awkward as you can, and miss your rat about six or seven foot.
Throw stiff-armed from the shoulder, like there was a pivot there
for it to turn on--like a girl; not from the wrist and elbow, with
your arm out to one side, like a boy. And mind you, when a girl
tries to catch anything in her lap she throws her knees apart; she
don't clap them together the way you did when you catched the lump
of lead. Why, I spotted you for a boy when you was threading the
needle, and I contrived the other things just to make certain."</p>

<br>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
<p>Some of the most succulent humor is connected with the swindling
exploits of the Duke and the King, who "work" the towns along the
bank and make considerable money. Their crowning work was in
playing the role of the English heirs of old Peter Wilks, a moneyed
resident of one of the river towns, who had just died. In the
construction of this plot Mark Twain surpasses himself and the
amount of really plausible lies which he manages to dovetail
together is something extraordinary. A half-dozen times the
adventurers are on the eve of exposure, but their fertility and
luck save them. Space is lacking to do more than give one extract
from this episode, which is a story in itself, descriptive of the
Arkansas undertaker at the funeral of old Peter:</p>

<br>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td valign="top"><br>
<center><a href="hfquots.html#i"><img src="../twnlnk.GIF" border=
"0"></a></center>
</td>
<td>
<p>When the place was packed full the undertaker he slid around in
his black gloves with his softy soothering ways, putting on the
last touches, and getting people and things all ship-shape and
comfortable, and making no more sound than a cat. He never spoke;
he moved people around, he squeezed in late ones, he opened up
passageways, and done it with nods, and signs with his hands. Then
he took his place over against the wall. He was the softest,
glidingest, stealthiest man I ever see; and there warn't no more
smile to him than there is to a ham.</p>

<p>They had borrowed a melodeum -- a sick one; and when everything
was ready a young woman set down and worked it, and it was pretty
skreeky and colicky, and everybody joined in and sung, and Peter
was the only one that had a good thing, according to my notion.
Then the Reverend Hobson opened up, slow and solemn, and begun to
talk; and straight off the most outrageous row busted out in the
cellar a body ever heard; it was only one dog, but he made a most
powerful racket, and he kept it up right along; the parson he had
to stand there, over the coffin, and wait -- you couldn't hear
yourself think. It was right down awkward, and nobody didn't seem
to know what to do. But pretty soon they see that long-legged
undertaker make a sign to the preacher as much as to say, "Don't
you worry -- just depend on me." Then he stooped down and begun to
glide along the wall, just his shoulders showing over the people's
heads. So he glided along, and the powwow and racket getting more
and more outrageous all the time; and at last, when he had gone
around two sides of the room, he disappears down cellar. Then in
about two seconds we heard a whack, and the dog he finished up with
a most amazing howl or two, and then everything was dead still, and
the parson begun his solemn talk where he left off. In a minute or
two here comes this undertaker's back and shoulders gliding along
the wall again; and so he glided and glided around three sides of
the room, and then rose up, and shaded his mouth with his hands,
and stretched his neck out towards the preacher, over the people's
heads, and says, in a kind of a coarse whisper, "He had a rat!"
Then he drooped down and glided along the wall again to his place.
You could see it was a great satisfaction to the people, because
naturally they wanted to know. A little thing like that don't cost
nothing, and it's just the little things that makes a man to be
looked up to and liked. There warn't no more popular man in town
than what that undertaker was.</p>

<br>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
<p>There are dozens of descriptive bits as good as this and others
in which there is no attempt at caricature, such, for instance, as
the picture of the old one-horse cotton plantation of Phelps, which
any one who has seen the South will recognize as a type. What Mark
Twain can do in short sketches of persons is shown by the portrait
of old Mrs. Hotchkiss, which is one of the best things in the book.
Any one who has ever lived in the Southwest, or who has visited
that section, will recognize the truth of all these sketches and
the art with which they are brought into this story. To all readers
we can commend the story as eminently readable. The person who can
withstand the abounding humor of this book must be proof against
all jokes except of the Joe Miller order. The volume is very well
gotten up, the illustrations adding materially to the fun of the
story.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<a href="hucrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="perry.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="sfdaily">
<head>
<title>Daily Examiner Reviews Huck</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 American Western Unfavorable </keyword> -->
<h2><i>San Francisco Daily Examiner</i>[unsigned]<br>
1885: March 9</h2>

<br>


<center>
<table border="0" width="650" cellpadding="5">
<tr>
<td>
<center><img src="../margin.GIF"></center>
</td>
<td>
<p>The San Francisco agents of this book give notice that, though
some unavoidable delays have occurred, this volume is now ready for
delivery to subscribers. As to the work itself, it is well
described by the author, as being without a motive, a moral, or a
plot. The only reason to be, as the French say, is probably that
the author thought he could make some money by publishing a book of
some kind, and here it is--such as it is. It is apparently, as the
art critics say, a pot-boiler in its baldest form. As a picture of
life in the Southwest, however, there is little to be said in the
book's favor, though there are several passages which are drawn
with much ability, with occasionally a touch of a sort of grotesque
pathos which greatly interests the reader. As to the rest, it is
very much of the same character as many of the author's Pacific
Coast sketches, in the utter absence of truth and being unlike
anything that ever existed in the earth, above the earth, or in the
waters under the earth. Some twenty-two years since, when Mr.
Clemens was working as a reporter on the <i>Territorial
Enterprise,</i> published in Virginia City, Nevada, he signalized
his career by getting up a series of startling stories, the most
prominent feature of which was the lack of a grain of fact. One of
Clemens' most notorious lucutrations in this line was the report of
the massacre of a whole family at Van Sickles or Empire City, which
caused much horror and also great annoyance. Mark Twain contended
that this was a good joke, and the parties who were inconvenienced
should not have got angry. When, however, it was his ox that was
gored, there were no such feelings of equanimity exhibited on his
side of the house. For instance, afterward, when he paid a visit to
his old haunts on the Comstock, a party of his former intimates
played a practical joke on him, he was one of the maddest mortals
who could be seen in a day's march. Something, however, should be
said in praise of the style in which the book has been published.
It is plentifully illustrated with engravings of no mean skill, and
is well printed in fine, clear type.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

<a href="hucrevhp.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="bosdail3.html"><img src="../raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="stldemo">
<head>
<title>Daily Missouri Democrat Reviews Savages</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1867 Lecture Savages Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<h2><b>From St. Louis <i>Daily Missouri Democrat</i>,<br>
26 March 1867</b><br>
<br>
</h2>

<p>M<font size="-1">ARK</font> T<font size="-1">WAIN'S</font>
L<font size="-1">ECTURE</font>.--The lecture to be delivered
to-night in Library Hall by "Mark Twain," for the benefit of South
St. Louis Mission Sunday School, has attracted much attention. The
lecture will be on the Sandwich Islands, where the lecturer has
spent several months time.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Tickets of admission can be procured at
McIntyre's book store, No. 9 South Fifth Street, and at the
door.</p>

<hr width="75%">
<center><img src="savrev3.jpg" alt=
"St. Louis Daily Missouri Democrat, 28 March 1867"></center>

<br>
<br>


<center><b><font size="+1">MARK TWAIN</font><br>
<font size="-1">AT THE MERCANTILE LIBRARY HALL</font><br>
TUESDAY NIGHT.</b></center>

<br>
<p>A gentleman stepped on the stage and announced that wisdom would
commence to flow precisely at eight o'clock. To while away the time
till then, he said he "would treat them with a whistling, which
some called foolish," and a song, "The moon shines bright," both of
which won loud and prolonged applause. Precisely at eight o'clock,
at previously announced, the veritable Mark Twain himself appeared,
to the great delight of the audience. As he informed the audience,
he had been residing in the Sandwich Islands. Being one of the
wandering Bohemians, he had devoted his time to obtaining
information to let the public know of the result of his travels.
After his residence there, he was well-qualified to deliver an
interesting, instructive and amusing lecture. He certainly
succeeded in making it all three. His remarks were witty and
humorous. He kept his audience in a roar of laughter and a
perpetual chuckle. His wit was not of the evanescent kind. One was
not obliged to be always on the qui vive to catch the brilliant
flashes of wit that he dealt with so much ease. Neither was it of
that kind which Douglas Jerrold defines dogmatism, "puppyism come
to maturity."</p>

<p>He was decidedly humorous also. He did not cut the audience
short. His humor was tangible, and the laugh raised at the first
hearing of his remarks died not away with the conclusion of the
sentence. One seemed to be chuckling incessantly, and with faces
wreathed in smiles, the audience listened for the next remarks,
which increased the chuckles to a hearty laugh.</p>

<p>He commenced his lecture on the Sandwich Islands by stating:
"That when at Julesberg, which is about four hundred miles west of
St. Louis, he heard a little anecdote of Horace Greeley, going to
lecture at Carson, from a man who said he was afraid that he would
be too late to hear him. Further westward still, he heard the same
anecdote, or a pleasing incident about the mail service, in
connection with Horace Greeley, and again he heard it in Nevada, or
was about to hear it, when he stopped the story teller, and
inquired of him, if the anecdote was about Horace Greeley, the mail
service, the lecture and Carson City. On being told it was, he
declined hearing it. On coming east, he had seen that anecdote in
almost every newspaper, but he had not heard it in St. Louis, and
therefore he thought he would tell it, as a pleasing incident about
the mail service, in connection with Horace Greeley going to
lecture at Carson City.</p>

<p>Ladies and gentlemen, I suppose you are all interested in the
Sandwich Islands; of course you must be, because it is the center
of missionary labor. And you all know that hymn which so aptly
refers to it; (he repeats)<br>
</p>

<center>"From Greenland's icy mountains," &amp;c.</center>

As no one was going to lead the singing, he would leave it where it
was.

<p>Sandwich Islands are situated about 2100 miles west of San
Francisco. I wonder why they were placed in the middle of the
ocean; as it is none of our business we won't talk any more about
it. It is a splendid sugar country, better than the best of
Louisiana land, can get from 5,000 to 13,000 pounds of sugar raised
to the acre, but I own no acre there.</p>

<p>The islands are twelve in number, and have volcanoes, the
largest dead volcanoes in the world. Eighty years ago, there was a
population of 400,000 people. The white men came, brought
civilization and several other diseases, and now the race is fast
dying out, and will be extinct in about fifty years hence. They got
consumptive when civilization got there, and they will shortly
retire from business. When they pack up and leave, we will take
possession as lawful heirs. There are 3000 whites there, mostly
Americans, and they are still increasing. They own all the money,
control all the commerce, and own all the ships. They have a
constitutional monarchy, but they have no constitution, and the
monarchy is only an empty name. A Kanaka or native is nobody unless
he has a princely income of $75 annually, or a splendid estate
worth $100. The country is full of office-holders and
office-seekers; there are plenty of such noble patriots. Of almost
any party of three men, two would be office-holders and one an
office-seeker. In a little island, half the size of one of the
wards of St. Louis, there are lots of noblemen, princes, and men of
high degree, with grand titles, holding big offices, receiving
immense salaries--such as ministers of war, secretaries of the
navy, secretaries of state and ministers of justice. They make a
fine display of uniforms, and are very imposing at a funeral.
That's the country for a petty hero to go to, he would soon have
the conceit taken out of him. There are so many of them, that a
noble from any other country would be nobody. They only lionize
their own people, and therefore they lionize everybody. In
education, refinement, and culture, the sons and daughters of our
missionaries there need not be ashamed to compare themselves with
their brothers and sisters in the United States. And there has
never been a stain upon any of their names. The first thing a
stranger does, on arriving at the Islands, is to collect shinbones
of dead Kanakas, fossils and coral, but he never succeeds in
carrying any of them away, because he soon gets tired of it--the
novelty wears off. A stranger going there now need not be looking
for curiosities, for in the back-yard of every house he will see
piles of shinbones of dead Kanakas, heaps of fossils and stacks of
coral. He will also, as a first experiment, pick up about a dozen
Kanaka words; he won't talk English; he won't say good morning,
like a Christian; he will say all-ay-ho. One man had been there
three weeks, and he came to breakfast with me. I asked him how he
would have his beefsteak--rare or well-done. He replied,
"Muckee--muckee--guckee," &amp;c. Well, said I, you can muckee,
muckee, guckee yourself out of this. I won't have anything to do
with you. We can have any climate we want on the Sandwich Islands.
On the summits, which are 16,000 feet above the level of the
valley, whose tops are whitened by perpetual snow, we can have
everlasting winter, and near the sea shore everlasting summer. A
single glance of the eye takes in all the climates on the earth. It
was so cold on the tops of the mountains that I could not speak the
truth, but on level ground, I can speak the truth as well--as any
other man.</p>

<p>The climate is wonderfully healthy, for white people in
particular, so healthy that white people venture on the most
reckless imprudence. They get up too early; you can see them as
early as half past seven in the morning, and they attend to all
their business, and keep it up till sundown. It don't hurt 'em, it
don't kill 'em, and yet it ought to do so. I have seen it so hot in
California that greenbacks went up 142 in the shade.</p>

<p>The volcano of Kee-law-ay-oh is 17,000 feet in diameter, and
from 700 to 800 feet deep. Vesuvius is nowhere. It is the largest
dead volcano in the world. You witness a scene of unrivaled
sublimity, and witness the most astonishing sights. When the
volcano of Kee-law-ay-oh broke through a few years ago, lava flowed
out of it for twenty days and twenty nights, and made a stream
forty miles in length, till it reached the sea, tearing up forests
in its awful fiery path, swallowing up huts, destroying all
vegetation, rioting through shady dells and sinuous canyons. Amidst
this carnival of destruction, majestic columns of smoke ascended,
and formed a cloudy murky pall overhead. Sheets of green, blue,
lambent flame were shot upwards and pierced this vast gloom, making
all sublimely grand. [After this burst of eloquence, he clapped his
hands and the audience joined, making the vaulted roof of the
Library hall reverberate with the sounds of enthusiastic
applause.]</p>

<p>I once knew a great, tall gawky country editor, near
Sacramento,to whom I sent an ode of the sea, starting with "The
long, green swell of the Pacific." The country editor sent back a
letter and stated that I couldn't fool him, and he didn't want any
base insinuations from me. He knew who I meant when I wrote "the
long, green swell of the Pacific."</p>

<p>There is one thing characteristic of the tropics that a stranger
must have, whether he likes it or not, and that is the boo-hoo
fever. Its symptoms are nausea of the stomach, severe headache,
backache and bellyache, and a general utter indifference whether
the school keeps or not. You can't be a full citizen of the
Sandwich Island unless you have had the boo-hoo fever. You will
never forget it. I remember a little boy who had it once there. A
New Yorker asked him if he was afraid to die. He said, no; I am not
afraid to die of anything, except the boo-hoo fever. The moral
force used by the missionaries, in the Sandwich Islands, is not
much. But they are the right kind of men there--they have just the
grit, to hold on like grim death. Bishop Staley of the English
Missionary church is not very popular. The societies in London have
ceased to support him, and his mission has a dull, unhealthy look.
The King belongs to the church, but he never goes there, and he
still adheres to the pagan form of worship. The king is a
gentleman, but the American missionaries made him so. The bishop's
church is making some progress, and there is plenty of room for it;
but they will never succeed in ousting the American missionaries.
[After another burst of eloquence about some perennial flower, he
applauds himself; would repeat it again if requested to by the
audience; the audience requests him to proceed, but the lecturer
declines with such a comical gesture, that it sends the audience
into convulsions.]</p>

<p>In Honolulu, merchants go to their business at nine <font size=
"-1">A.M.</font>, and cease business at four <font size="-1">
P.M.</font> They will have nothing to do with business till next
morning. Why cannot we do so? But I did not come here to preach a
sermon to you, although I would as soon do it as not. A street
fight keeps the people excited for about two weeks; an elopement
gives them something to converse about for one year, but a murder
they will never get over talking about it. The whites of Honolulu
have no jokes to indulge in. They are not imbued with the spirit of
joking. I told some jokes to a quiet, sober-looking, grave, and
demure missionary, and I believe he is exercised over some of the
subtler ones to this day. The missionaries do not know one third
the names of sins which figure in the sin calendar. Pity we are not
more like them. The people do not get often drunk in that country;
the duties are too high. But I saw some of the wild ranchmen of
Hawaii drink kerosene and aquafortis, and I saw some of them get
drunk on a whole barrel of Mustang Liniment. When the natives eat,
they all eat socially, from the same calabash, one after the other,
with their fingers. They are not very particular or careful whether
these hands are washed or not. It is not absolutely necessary that
they should wash their hands. They have a fish called poy which
they eat. Eating poy will cure a drunkard. In order to like the poy
you must get used to it. It smells a good deal worse than it
tastes, and it tastes a good deal worse than it looks. I am sending
all my friends there.</p>

<p>The natives are of a rich, dark brown color, lazy, perhaps, but
not vicious, nor very virtuous. The women wear a long, loose calico
garment, but the men don't. [Loud and continued applause.] Guess I
won't continue that subject any longer. In former times the King's
person was sacred, he was the supreme head of the Church and State,
he was the captain over all, the arbiter of fate, the Lord of life.
There was a law that if a man came to the king with a wet head, he
should die; if any man's shadow fell on the king he had to die. If
the king put his taboo on anyone, there was no hope for him (by the
bye, from there we got our word tabooed). In former times the women
were abject slaves of the whole party. By the ancient taboo, (law
of the land,) death was the punishment of a woman who dared to sit
at the same table as a man. If she ate choice fruit, she was to
suffer the death penalty. The poor degraded savages of these
islands found out somehow that a woman ate some fruit in the Garden
of Eden, and the whole human race were suffering from that thing
ever since, and therefore they were not willing to take the chance
of some other evil overtaking them, by letting women eat any fruit.
But the American missionaries came, broke off the shackles from the
whole race, broke the power of the King, the State and the clergy,
and elevated the women to be the equal of the men. To-day, it is
the best educated nation in the world, of its size. Our
missionaries did it all. Every Kanaka has a dozen mothers. If they
like a woman, they call her mother. A Los Angelos man got there
once, and being boss over a party of Kanakas, one day one of them
came to him, and asked leave of absence to go and bury his mother.
Of course the leave was granted. In about a month he came to ask
for another leave of absence, for the same purpose, he got that
also. For several times he obtained leave of absence to go and bury
a mother. On the fifth demand, the Los Angelos man asked him how
many mothers he had. He answered--twelve--well, go and bury them
all, but don't let me see you again.</p>

<p>Those natives are strange folk. They are not afraid of death,
no, no more than a jilted Frenchman. If they take a notion to die,
nothing will stop them, you can't argue it out of them. They are
also fond of dogs. Such dogs that a white man would condemn at
first right on general principles. They are not large dogs,
neither; neither are they useful ones, but ugly curs. They love the
pups, better than any of their own family. They will take care of a
pup--pet him--feed him--caress him--fondle him, and when he has
become fat, they kill him--cook him--and then eat him. The natives
are very fond of raw fish, they will bite into a living fish, and
then eat him up. There used to be some cannnibals, but they are
almost played out. One cannibal once, after eating several
specimens of his own race, caught a missionary--killed him--and
served him up, but he could not digest the old missionary, no more
than he could a keg of nails; he died--miserably died. They are
also very fond of horses. These are probably worth about seven
dollars and a half--the scrubbiest lot of horses in the world. They
have eleven distinct styles of gallop. When one of them gallops he
mixes them all up at once, making it rather uncomfortable. The
women all ride like men. I wish to introduce that reform in this
country. Our ladies ought, by all means to ride like men, these
side saddles are so dangerous. When women meet each other on the
road, they run and kiss and hug each other, and they don't
blackguard each other behind each other's backs. I would like to
introduce that reform, also. I am not married, myself, but yet I
have no right to advertise myself this way publicly. Still I am not
married. In former times, when a great noble died, they bit pieces
of their own bodies off--knocked two or three teeth out. They would
also kill now and then an infant--bury him alive sometimes. But the
missionaries have annihilated infanticide. The American
missionaries are opposed to infanticide--for my part, I can't see
why. It is an old adage, be virtuous and you will be happy. The
nation are not virtuous and yet they are happy. When a woman cries,
a dozen others will congregate around and they will whine, blubber,
bawl and sniffle for an hour together. Rare sympathizing crowd. I
will end this chapter and the lecture by stating that they do
everything wrong end foremost, dismount from a horse the wrong
side, and mounting a horse on the wrong side. The same word stands
for good-bye and how do you do. In the noble American game of
high-low-jack or seven-up, they deal the cards to the left instead
of the right. They bathe in the middle of the day, and are liable
to kill themselves. When inviting a person to approach, they make a
sign, that with us is considered a repulsive motion. The duck, a
water bird, lives 5000 feet above the level of the water. They
dance at funerals, and spit on a spoon when they want to clean it.
They wash their shirts with a club, and iron them with a
brick-bat.</p>

<p>The talented young lecturer closed his flow of wisdom, by
stating that by an inadvertence, he had forgotten to inform his
appreciative audience "that the Reverend Robert Colyer was
lecturing at the Philharmonic hall, and it seemed by that omission
he had swindled the reverend gentleman out of a crowd." Everyone
retired highly delighted with the irrepressible Californian.</p>

<a href="sandmdwst.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="stlrep">
<head>
<title>St. Louis Republican Reviews Savages</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1867 Lecture Savages Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center><img src="savrev2.jpg" alt=
"St. Louis Daily Missouri Republican, 26 March 1867"></center>

<p>M<font size="-1">ARK</font> T<font size="-1">WAIN'S</font>
L<font size="-1">ECTURE ON THE</font> S<font size=
"-1">ANDWICH</font> I<font size="-1">SLANDS</font>. -- In
accordance with his humorous advertisement, Mark Twain delivered
his wonderful lecture, on the Sandwich Islands, at the Mercantile
Library Hall last night. The audience was large and appreciative,
and financially and every other way the entertainment proved a
complete success. In fact, Mark Twain achieved a very decided
success. He succeeded in doing what we have seen Emerson and other
literary magnates fail in attempting. He interested and amused a
large and promiscuous audience.</p>

<p>Mark has the gift of a bright and happy fancy, and expresses his
thoughts with no ordinary force and gracefulness of language. His
descriptive powers are good, and his descriptive powers very fair
for a young lecturer.</p>

<p>We shall attempt no synopsis of his entertainment. Ostensibly it
was on the Sandwich Islands, but while it contained not a little
valuable information and many passages of felicitious description,
it also embraced many other topics geographically and otherwise
foreign to the matter in hand, and had many a piquant piece of
humor interwoven, which, with the bright flash of genuine wit,
startled with laughter and kept alive the attention of the
audience. As to the wonderful [feats?] promised in the
advertisement they were forgotten in the intellectual amusement
afforded; and in the minor matter of swallowing a child Mark failed
to come to time, possibly because no lady volunteered an infant for
the occasion. We did not learn who was lucky enough to win
Lafayette Park.</p>

<p>Our readers are aware this lecture was delivered for the benefit
of the South St. Louis Mission Sunday School -- a most worthy
object and certainly calling for the patronage of the Christian
community.</p>

<p>This evening the lecture will be repeated at the same place and
for the same object. Let all go who wish to be instructed and
amused, and at the same time assist a deserving cause. "The wisdom
will begin to flow at eight o'clock, and not a drop should be
lost."</p>

<a href="sandmdwst.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twinsbg">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable/Boston Review</title>
</head>
<body>
<!-- <keyword>1884 Lecture Twins Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>Boston Globe</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1884: November 14</center>

<br>
<b><font size="+1">Mark Twain and Mr. Cable.</font></b><br>
<br>
 George W. Cable, the novelist, and Samuel L. Clemens, known to the
world as Mark Twain, entertained a very large audience, last
evening, at Music Hall, in the fifth of the Bay State course. Mr.
Cable gave selections from his own writings. He was in admirable
voice and some of the touches reminded one of some of the best
passages of Dickens. To see Mark Twain is to laugh and to hear him
is to laugh still more. His drollery is perennial, always fresh and
always entertaining. His struggle with the German language and his
trying conversation with the young American lady in the hotel
dining-room at Lucerne were especially funny, while the ghost story
had a startling conclusion.

<p>Rev. Henry Ward Beecher appears in the next entertainment of the
course, next Thursday evening.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twinsct">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable/Chicago Review</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>Chicago Tribune</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: January 17</center>

<br>
 <font size="+2"><b>Amusements. The Cable-Twain
Readings.</b></font> <br>


<p>The 800 persons who braved last night's storm to listen to the
"Mark Twain"-Cable readings, so-called, were more than repaid for
their fortitude. The entertainment was a novel one in that the
selections rendered by Messrs. Clemens and Cable were confined
entirely to their own writings. The public familiarity with the
literary productions of both authors made the readings very
enjoyable, however. There is a wide diversity in the manners,
methods, and styles of the two men, but a contrast only brings out
in stronger relief the merits of both. Mark Twain is funny in every
movement, word, and, it may be truly said, thought. The very
awkwardness of his gait and the homeliness of the words he uses
create a laugh, while the drolleries that persist in rolling from
his lips set his auditors off into uncontrollable roars. The
muscles of his face and mouth are rigid while he relates an
anecdote, but his little, twinkling eyes have a power of expression
that is wonderful, making his fun irresistible. He draws his wo</p>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twinsij">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable/Indianapolis Review</title>
</head>
<body>
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>Indianapolis Journal</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: January 8</center>

<br>
<b><font size="+1">AMUSEMENTS.<br>
 The Twain-Cable Readings.</font></b><br>


<p>The most unique and thoroughly enjoyable entertainment ever
given in Indianapolis was the Mark Twain- George W. Cable readings
at Plymouth Church, last night, and they were given before one of
the finest audiences that could be gathered, the auditorium of the
church being completely filled in parquette and galleries. From
first to last the immense assembly was in hearty sympathy with the
readers, and, for a time, it looked as if the intention was to hold
them all night. Mr. Cable's readings were entirely from Dr. Sevier,
and they introduced Mary Richling Narcisse, Kate Riley and
Ristofalo, and, incidentally, Mr. Richling. They were, in
substance, the same selections he read here last winter; but he has
them now in much better control, and is enabled to give more
attention to nicety of expression than then, for he was then too
closely confined to the printed page before him. For the third
number, "Narcisse Putting on Mourning for Lord Byron," Mr. Cable
substituted some Creole songs, which were received with great favor
and heartily encored, to which he responded with the one he sang
here at his former appearance. The best contribution he made to the
evening's entertainment was Mary Richling's night ride, probably
because of its serious contrast to the prevalent humorous tone of
the programme. It was a fine rendering of a fine bit of descriptive
writing, a real picture painted by an artist. Mark Twain is simply
indescribable. The drollery of his appearance and manner invests
the commonplace and wearisome with a freshness and comicality that
is irresistible. The story of King Sollermun, printed in the last
Century, is by no means easy reading. In cold type it seems to be
trivial to the last degree; but as Mr. Clemens gave it last night,
it set the audience in a perfect storm of boisterous merriment. His
introductory dissertation on the peculiar grammatical construction
of the German language, and the "whistling story" he told in answer
to one of the furious encores given him, were his best numbers,
although there was a verisimilitude about his conversation with the
lady at the Lucerne Sweitzer-Rof, wherein they talked about old
times of which he knew and remembered nothing, that appealed to
everybody's experience in a like "trying situation." The last
number of Twain, and of the programme, was the ghost story of the
golden arm, which ended with a thump, starting everyone out of
their seats at a quarter past 10 o'clock, after two hours of
thoroughly enjoyable fun and sentiment. The large, intelligent and
appreciative audience was an indication of the standing of these
two writers in American literature as recognized in
Indianapolis.</p>

<br>


<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twinslc">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable/Louisville Review</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h1><i>The Louisville Courier-Journal</i></h1>
</center>

<center>1885: January 6</center>

<br>
 <font size="+1"><b>Cable and Twain's Reading</b></font>

<p>Despite the rain there was a large audience at Leiderkranz Hall
last night to hear Cable and Mark Twain read. Mr. Cable last year
prepared for himself a welcome to Louisville, and the people were
ready with a hearty greeting for Mr. Clemens.</p>

<p>Mr. Cable's selections were familiar to the audience, as was the
manner of his interpretation, but they lost none of their charm on
this account. "Narcisse" and "Kate Riley" and "Richling" and
"Restofalo" delighted every one last night with their strange and
fascinating humor, of which one never wearies, but the most
striking and effective of the pieces recited by Mr. Cable was "Mary
Richling's Night Ride." There is no more pathetic, no more moving
story in all Mr. Cable has written than that which recounts the
weary wandering of "Mary Richling." Caught in the North when the
war broke over the land with her child, whom her husband has never
seen, she started for New Orleans, confident she could somewhere
pierce the line. One disappointment followed another, but the
brave-hearted woman never lost courage. Finally it seemed all
obstacles were conquered, and, under the guidance and protection of
a spy, she rode through the lines, avoiding the pickets and
escaping the scouts. It is this last ride Mr. Cable reads with such
dramatic force, and it is wise to repeat it to-night.</p>

<p>Mark Twain's humor is indescribable, as it is inimitable. His
"Tragic Tale of a Fishwife," in its wild absurdities and
extravagant incongruities, was greeted with continuous laughter,
the appreciation of the situation, no doubt, being heightened by
the recollection that last winter there was in Louisville a
professor who promised to teach the German language in six weeks,
and in the audience there were several score who once thought they
had learned it in that time. Mark Twain promises to-night, in
addition to regular programme, to tell the story of the "Jumping
Frog." There should be to-night even a larger audience than on last
night, and it is to be hoped those who secure seats in advance will
obtain them, and the annoyance experienced last night be
avoided.</p>

<p>The following is the programme for this evening:</p>

<table>
<tr>
<td>
<pre>
1. From Dr. Sevier--Narcisse's Views on Chirography. Raoul Innerarity announces his marriage....Geo. W. Cable
2. Certain Personal Episodes....Mark Twain
3. From the Grandissimes--Selection....Geo. W. Cable
4. Why I lost the Editorship....Mark Twain
5. From Dr. Sevier--Mary's Night Ride...Geo. W. Cable
6. Selection...Mark Twain.

</pre>
</td>
</tr>
</table>

<hr width="35%">
<center>
<h1><i><a name="a">The Louisville Courier-Journal</a></i></h1>
</center>

<center>1885: January 7</center>

<br>
 T<font size="-1">HE</font> second reading by Mark Twain and Mr.
Cable at Leiderkranz Hall drew a crowded house last night. The
evening was in every way delightful and both gentlemen were
applauded again and again. Mark Twain's story of "How he Ceased to
be an Editor" and Mr. Cable's account of "Mary Richling's Midnight
Ride" were the hits of the evening.

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twinsnyt">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable/Times Review</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1884 Lecture Twins Eastern Mixed </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>New York Times</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1884: November 19</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">Genius and Versatility. Mr. Cable Exhibits Both
and Mark Twain Something Else.</font></b> <br>


<p>A numerous and enthusiastic audience assembled in Chickering
Hall last evening to listen to readings from the writings of Mr.
Samuel L. Clemens--who prefers to be known as "Mark Twain"--and Mr.
George W. Cable. The gentlemen who read were the gentlemen who had
written. The management, in its newspaper advertisements, spoke of
the entertainment as a "combination of genius and versatility," but
neglected to say which of the gentlemen had the genius and which
the versatility. Some of those who were present last evening may
have felt justified in coming to the conclusion that Mr. Cable
represented both these elements, while Mr. Clemens was simply man,
after the fashion of that famous hunting animal one-half of which
was pure Irish setter and the other half "just plain dog." Mr.
Cable was humorous, pathetic, weird, grotesque, tender, and
melodramatic by turns, while Mr. Clemens confined his efforts to
the ridicule of such ridiculous matters as aged colored gentlemen,
the German language, and himself.</p>

<p>It became evident early in the evening that the gentlemen who
conceived the plan of bringing these two readers together had a
marvelous faculty for grasping the sublimest possibilities of
contrast. The audience appeared, however, to enjoy the sensation of
dropping abruptly downward from such delightful people as Narcisse,
Ristofalo, and Kate Riley to such earthy creatures as Huckleberry
Finn.</p>

<p>The first section was from "Dr. Sevier," the interesting scene
in which Narcisse thinks she can "baw that fifty dollar" himself.
Then Mr. Clemens recited a selection from "The Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn," which will be continued in Mr. Clemens's next
book. Mr. Cable followed with the scene from "Dr. Sevier," in which
Kate Riley yields her hand so eagerly to Ristofalo. The audience
appeared to enjoy hugely the Italian's complacent "Da's all right."
Mr. Clemens then read his "Tragic Tale of a Fishwife," which
contained some remarkable linguistic contortions produced by
adapting the German genders to the English language. Mr. Clemens
was recalled after this effort and ladled out another section of
the "Huckleberry Finn" advance sheets.</p>

<p>Then Mr. Cable read "A Sound of Drums," from "Dr. Sevier." This
masterly bit of word-painting was recited with fine elocutionary
art, and held the audience spellbound to the close, when a burst of
enthusiastic applause recalled Mr. Cable to the stage and compelled
him to sing one of the old Confederate war songs that he learned by
the camp fire. Mr. Clemens recited "A Trying Situation," one of
those peculiar productions which attributes to its author much
idiocy, and suggests the thought that it was written in the hope
that it would make men deem the writer a very different kind of
man. Mr. Cable's last selection from "Dr. Sevier" was "Mary's Night
Ride," in which weirdness, tenderness, and melodramatic force were
joined with a rare skill that evoked hearty and continued
applause.</p>

<p>Mr. Clemens concluded the entertainment with "A Ghost Story,"
which had no merit beyond the reader's suggestion that it was a
queer story to tell children at bedtime. This afternoon the same
programme will be given, and this evening this combination of
contrasts will present a fresh batch of readings.</p>

<hr width="25%">
<center>
<h1><i>New <a name="c">York</a> Tribune</i></h1>
</center>

<center>1884: November 20</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">READINGS BY CLEMENS AND CABLE.</font></b> <br>


<p>Chickering Hall was well filled yesterday afternoon, in spite of
the rain, for the readings of Mark Twain and George W. Cable. The
audience consisted principally of ladies and, if not enthusiastic,
showed a full appreciation of the performance. Mr. Cable presented
four selections from "Dr. Sevier." His comic selections roused
little more than languid laughter. "Mary's Night Ride," however,
the last piece which he gave, was of a serious character, and met
with considerable applause. Mr. Clemens gave only humorous pieces.
"A Trying Situation" seemed to be specially acceptable to the
audience.</p>

<p>Despite the rainy weather, a great many people heard the
readings in the evening. Mr. Clemens' stories were punctuated with
laughter at every few words. Mr. Cable generally received his
applause all in a lump at the end.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour
Schedule</a>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<a href="tourrevs.html#b">Back
to Tour Reviews</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twinssld">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable/St. Louis</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Mixed </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>St. Louis Daily Globe Democrat</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: January 10 &amp; 11</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">Mark Twain and George W. Cable</font></b> <br>
[10 January]<br>
<p>Mark Twain and George W. Cable entertained about 700 of their
admirers in Mercantile Library Hall last night. They gave recitals
of selections from their respective work, Mark Twain having four
pieces on the programme and Mr. Cable the same number. Cable chose
passages from his novel <i>Dr. Sevier</i>, in which he aimed to
illustrate the characters of Narcisse, the Creole, Kate Riley and
Mary Richley. All his recitals were successful in pleasing the
audience, and before the evening was at an end the author of <i>
Creole Days</i> was a strong favorite with all present. Mark Twain
did not fail, however, to hold his own. He kept the assemblage in
excellent humor with his literary surprises, and in the "King
Sollemun" passage from <i>Huckleberry Finn</i>, the "Tragic Tale of
a Fishwife," he which he illustrated the reckless distribution of
genders among the nouns of the German language, and in the other
selections he tickled the risibles of the audience to an extent
that satisfactorily established the pop</p>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twinswp">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable/Washington Review</title>
</head>
<body>
<!-- <keyword>1884 Lecture Twins Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>Washington Post</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1884: November 25</center>

<br>
 [<i>The</i> Post <i>put this review in the lead position on its
front page, and included with it these two illustrations.</i>]

<p><b><font size="+1">LAUGHING AT PURE FUN.</font><br>
MARK TWAIN AND CABLE TAKE TURNS AT ENTERTAINING AN AUDIENCE.<br>
Dramatic and Humorous Recitations from "Dr. Sevier"--<br>
Merriment at the Expense of the German Language and<br>
A Thrilling Ghost Story.</b><br>
<br>
 "Mark Twain" and George W. Cable alternately appeared on the
platform of Congregational Church last night. As soon as one bowed
his exit the other ran up the steps, not because they were in a
hurry, as the former explained, but because the programme was
long.</p>

<p><img src="wshpst1.jpg" align="left" hspace="8" vspace="4">Mr.
Cable was the first to appear, and was greeted with applause. He is
of medium height, slender, with a jet black silky beard, and his
dark eyes sparkle with intelligence. His rich and melodious voice
rises to a high falsetto in its portrayal of female character. In
his opening selection he impersonated Narcisse, John and Mary
Richling. One forgot the speaker and saw John, grave and quiet, and
Mary, "pushing her small feet back and forth on the floor,"
listening to the delightful accent and original philosophy of
Narcisse, as he sat twitching uneasily in his chair, with his mind
fixed on "that fifty dolla" which he "could baw from Mistoo
Itchling." Afterwards it was Kate Reilly, with her smirking and her
brogue, who called Ristofalo "a desaving crature," while the
stumpy, honest Italian answered, "Dat's alright," and putting his
arm around her called her "Kate" to her outward astonishment but
inward delight; or, later, the audience followed Mary and little
Alice and the spy in their lonely midnight ri</p>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twinswp2">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable/Washington Review</title>
</head>
<body>
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Eastern Favorable </keyword> --><img
src="twinswp.jpg" align="left" hspace="8">
<center>
<h2><i>Washington Post</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: March 1</center>

<br>
<b><font size="+1">AMUSEMENTS.</font></b><br>
<br>
 T<font size="-1">HE</font> T<font size="-1">WAIN</font>-C<font
size="-1">ABLE</font> R<font size="-1">EADINGS</font>. -- The two
humorous worthies -- Mark Twain and George W. Cable -- gave another
series of readings from their own works at the Congregational
Church last night. The audience was large and the entertainment an
entire success.<br clear="left">
<font size="-1">This engraving appeared as an ad in the <i>Post</i>
on the day of the lecture. The caption refers to MT as "a reader of
his own superb fun" and Cable as "The distinguished Southern
novelist presenting the matchless scenes of his own
romances."</font><br>
<br>


<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur1">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Indianapolis Review [February]</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>Indianapolis Journal</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: February 8</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">THE TWAIN-CABLE COMBINATION.</font></b><br>
<br>
 A very fine audience greeted Mr. George W. Cable and Mr. Samuel L.
Clemens, at the Plymouth Church, last night, but not so large as
the one they faced when here less than a month ago. This is to be
accounted for, probably, because of the matinee in the afternoon,
when the programme was the same as that given at night, and also
because it is easy to have the taste palled with the peculiar
entertainment they give. Mr. Cable's principle selections were from
the Grandissimes, introducing the character of Ravel Innerarity,
with his wonderful picture of "Louisiana Refusing to Enter the
Union," and the announcement of his marriage as he changes boats on
the beautiful waters of Lake Catharine. The preamble to this latter
appearance of the Creole artist was a splendid bit of landscape
painting, soft and sensuous with the beauty of that Southern sky,
air and water in and about the chain of lakes forming the back
water-way between New Orleans and the gulf. He again interpolated
three of the creole love songs, and closed his part of the
programme with "Mary's Night Ride," from Dr. Sevier, a bit of
artistic work, eager and intense both in the writing and the
reading. It is much the best thing Mr. Cable gave. Mark Twain was
as funny as ever. His encounter with the newspaper interviewer, in
which he broke down that redoubtable personage with his atrocious
burlesques upon fact, put the audience in a mood to be tickled to
death with the story of Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer in their
arrangement of "Jim's" escape from the cabin in accordance with the
dramatic unities of history and romance; with the mistake of the
Blue Jay, who attempted to fill up the dismantled cabin with acorns
dropped through a knot-hole in the roof; and the story of his duel
in Nevada, in which he was converted from a blood-thirsty hunter of
men into a mild and cooing dove, who, having a controversy with a
person now, would take him out quietly and talk with him, and
reason with him -- and kill him. In answer to a furious encore,
Twain gave the adventure of the miner's cat, which was blown up in
a blast, and ever afterward exhibited an unconquerable aversion to
quartz mining. As an entirety the evening was most enjoyable, and
if it seemed less full of zest than the previous one, it was
because the novelty had somewhat worn away, and not that the
performance was below standard. The general verdict was expressed
by a fair auditor in the gallery, who, while Mr. Twain was telling
of his duel, gave a long-protracted half-musical shriek, dying away
in a hysteria and a rupture of whalebone.

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur10">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Troy Review</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1884 Lecture Twins Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Troy (New York) Daily Times</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1884: December 3</center>

<br>
 -- The unique entertainment given by Mark Twain and George W.
Cable at Music Hall last evening was attended by an audience which
filled nearly every seat on the floor and in the galleries. Mr.
Cable has taken his place among the best American novelists and has
created a unique and striking original style of story. There was
much curiosity, therefore, to see the author of the Creole tales
which have won such remarkable popularity with the reading public
of late years. Mr. Cable is not a handsome man, but his face and
head show an active intellect and a vivid imagination. His
recitations, which were all taken from his strongest work, "Dr.
Sevier," were delivered in a striking and pleasing though not
artistic manner. His singing of Creole songs was warmly applauded.
Mark Twain, though laboring under a severe cold, managed to make
himself heard by the large audience, which showed a disposition to
laugh whether he spoke or was silent. There was nothing remarkably
witty in his remarks, but his manner and the humorous expression of
his mouth and eyes would create laughter if he should read an act
of congress to an audience. Altogether, the entertainment was
pleasing, not only from its novelty, but from the originality of
the men who conducted it. It did not drag, and the audience as it
retired at 10:45 o'clock was by no means weary of listening to the
pathos and humor of Cable and the laughable remarks of Mark Twain.
A literary entertainment is a success if the auditors remain in
their places to the end. Few, if any, left the hall last evening
till they were startled from their seats by the sudden ending of
Mark Twain's ghost story.

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur12">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Philadelphia Review (1)</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1884 Lecture Twins Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Philadelphia Inquirer</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1884: November 22</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">The Mark Twain-Cable Readings.</font></b><br>
<br>
Major J.B. Pond has brought before the public for three readings in
this city the names Mark Twain and George W. Cable, and they have
proved a powerful attraction among the most cultivated and
intelligent people of this city. The first reading was given last
night at Association Hall, where a very select audience assembled,
filling three circles of the pretty auditorium.

<p>It is "too late a week" to criticize work so artistic and so
well known. Suffice it to say that Mr. Cable gave "Narcisse and
John and Mary Richling," from "Dr. Sevier," the courting scene in
the same book in which Kate Riley so amusingly chaffs Ristofalo,
"Narcisse in Mourning for Lady Byron," and the great humorist
recited, while tears ran down his listeners' cheeks, some scenes
from the advance sheets of the "Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" and
the "Tragic Tale of the Fishwife," described "A Trying Situation,"
one of his funniest efforts, in which a gentleman who does not
recognize a lady, who does recognize him, is utterly mystified and
overwhelmingly embarrassed by her questioning him about a
fictitious past, in what she calls "a delightful talk about old
times," and wound up with a ghost story which convulsed his
audience. The next entertainments will take place at Association
Hall on the afternoon and evening of Wednesday, November 26, when,
as Mr. Clemens expresses it, he will "continue to make his last,
final farewell appearance."</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur13">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Philadelphia Review (2)</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1884 Lecture Twins Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Philadelphia Inquirer</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1884: November 27</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">Mark Twain's Humorous Sayings.</font></b><br>
<br>
A very appreciative audience gathered last evening at Association
Hall to listen to the readings of Mark Twain and George W. Cable.
Mr. Cable gave some of his inimitable stories of Southern life and
thrilling romances of the war, which were generously applauded.
Alternately the audience was kept rollicking with laughter at the
droll yarns of America's prince of humorists, the ever-comical Mark
Twain. A vein of dry humor ran through all of his tales, and made
him, as usual, popular with the audience.

<p>One of his yarns contemplated the reform of the human race by
preventing the habit of profanity among men. The reform was to be
accomplished by substituting mechanical swearing through the means
of the phonograph. The effect of this contrivance on shipboard,
colored by all the possibilities of swearing in foreign languages,
and swearing backwards and multiplying the force of it by placing
as many as one hundred and fifty phonographs in different parts of
the ship was too much for the most serious audience in the world,
and there was a continuous burst of laughter.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur14">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Pittsburgh Review</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1884 Lecture Twins Eastern Unfavorable</keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Pittsburg Dispatch</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1884: December 30</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">"TWAIN" AND CABLE.</font></b><br>
<b>"Mark Twain" and George W. Cable Give Recitations from Their Own
Works</b><br>
<b>IT IS AN ADVERTISING HIPPODROME</b><br>
<b>Neither of Them Reads Well -- "Mark Twain" Losing His
Ground</b><br>
<br>
 S.L. Clemens, better known as "Mark Twain," and Mr. George W.
Cable recited selections from their own writings last night at the
Cumberland Presbyterian church. The congregation was large, and
there was an air of intellectuality about the people that betokened
keen appreciation and accurate comprehension. One thing was
noticeable among the listeners: Nearly everyone had a long nose. If
those who were there will glance at each other's companion, this
exceptional gathering of long and well-shaped noses will be easily
discerned. The occasion was supposed to be a humorous one. Long
noses indicate serious intelligence. It may be because the
entertainment was a church performance, the true character of it
was not suspected.

<p>Mr. Cable, who has become known to the public as the writer of
"Old Creole Days," "The Grandissimes" and "Dr. Sevier," was the
first to appear. When he mounted the pulpit, he looked like an elf,
save his big head, long pointed brown beard and Vandyke moustache.
He was dressed in conventional black, with clawhammer coat. The
forehead is fairly broad, and medium high; it has an blunt
appearance. His sloping, narrow shoulders and diminutive height,
set off by his big head and full face, give him a pompous air,
which is increased by an assumed dignity of speech and put-on
deepness of voice that tends to make the irreverent laugh.</p>

<center><font size="-1"><b>ADVERTISING THEIR
BOOKS.</b></font></center>

<br>
 He introduced himself to the audience in a labored humorous way,
which he had evidently caught by association with his leading man
and comedian, "Mark Twain" -- caught by inoculation from an
imperfect virus quill. He began by doing a silly thing, which was
followed by his co-partner in this enterprise of advertising each
other's books. The silly thing was to announce that he would not
read the piece announced on the programme but another, viz.
"Narcisse's Visit to Widow Riley," a selection from "Dr. Sevier."
The choice was not excellent, but it really could make little
difference, for Mr. Cable soon proved himself not only a poor
reader, but a positively bad reader, or reciter. He has no mimic
power. When he attempted to interpret "Widow Riley's" part, which
is given in the brogue of a simpering, coquettish widow, he failed
dismally. His voice, utterly untrained and with but little compass,
got to a pitch where it became simply ridiculous.

<p>Mark Twain and Mr. Cable recited alternately. As Mr. Cable began
the show, it is well to finish with him before speaking of the
author of "Tom Sawyer." Mr. Cable's next effort was a visit from
"Ristofalo" to the "Widow Riley." "Ristofalo" is a placid,
unexcitable, unemotional being, whom Mr. Cable fairly represented
in his courtship of the widow. His recital of the widow's lines
were ludicrous -- not the lines, but Mr. Cable's recital. His want
of elocutionary powers was wofully displayed here, and the thought
could not be kept back that so far as Mr. Cable was concerned this
scheme of his and Mr. Clemens's was an unwarranted hippodrome.</p>

<p>At Mr. Cable's next call he, instead of following out the
programme, substituted two Creole songs which he said retained
African barbarity, and he asserted that the latter part was all he
retained of the songs. Mr. Cable spoke better than he knew in that.
It was barbarous. Even though he rendered them true to life, there
was no excuse for producing them, for they were neither instructive
nor amusing. While he was chanting them the audience was craning
their necks and looking in the direction of the "stage entrance,"
as if they expected every moment to see Mr. Clemens come out clad
in a blanket with face painted and hair bedecked with feathers,
waving a tomahawk, and dance a savage war dance. Mr. Clemens missed
his opportunity.</p>

<p>The final appearance of Mr. Cable was when he recited "Mary's
Night Ride," from "Dr. Sevier." This describes the race for life of
a woman on horseback carrying her babe in her arms, as she tries to
escape the "lines" of the Confederate soldiers. There is all
possible opportunity for realistic declamation. Mr. Cable made many
of his audience laugh by his shouting and ranting. He declaimed in
a reckless manner, that showed he had no idea of either elocution
or declamation. Whilst he points to Mary flying at a mile a minute
out of danger, instead of following his pointed finger with his
eye, he looks at the audience, who in turn glance from his eyes to
his finger, and mentally ask "where is Mary?"</p>

<center><font size="-1"><b>"MARK TWAIN"</b></font></center>

<br>
 When the six-foot, raw-boned "Mark Twain," with his swallow-tail
coat and white tie, stepped out, he looked 30 years older than he
did when he appeared in this city 17 years ago. His kinky, bushy
hair and his heavy moustache have grown gray. The face has become
thin. The eyes are somewhat sunken. The square jaw bones cut a
sharper line than ever. The humorist now appears a sad victim of
his own jokes. Although he said he would not be introduced,
"because he had been 17 years ago," many of his hearers who had
heard him before, at that introduction, would have required
another, to have known him.

<p>His preliminary remarks were devoted to his change of programme.
He then related or recited his adventures with a young lady in
Switzerland, who made believe she knew him, and asked him all sorts
of questions about imaginary beings, to all of which he had
answered as though he knew the people. It was funny; and, although
Mr. Clemens's drawling manner of speech, which of itself is quaint
and laughter-provoking, has grown more marked and his words are not
always heard, he succeeded in delighting his listeners. He recited
most of the evening with his eyes closed, and in a manner of fact
sort of way that was comical. Still he did not make his own
writings half so laughable as they are made every day by
elocutionists all over the land.</p>

<p>The next selection was from "Huckleberry Finn," a kind of sequel
to "Tom Sawyer," and which is not yet published. It related the
troubles of two prankish boys who freed a slave imprisoned in an
old cabin. There were a hundred ludicrous incidents in it, which
could but stir the risibilities of a very appreciative audience. In
his second call he continued the story of the boys' comical tricks
and perplexities, which in spite of his inanimate recital, kept the
hearers in a smile all the while he spoke.</p>

<p>The last was a commonplace humorosity, built up, carpenter-like,
out of the grammatical idiosyncrasies of the German language, a
source of fun for alleged funnymen as general and as common as
robbing the chicken coop and stealing watermelons. It was a painful
production that must have cost its author much labor but gave
little mental satisfaction. There is nothing very funny about it.
It lacks that spontaneousness that is the real sign of pure mirth
and humor. Besides, it was heavy and execrably read. In this
recitation he seems to have taken lessons from Mr. Cable.</p>

<p>The whole performance was a hippodrome. Either's works shine
better in books than when read by them. The unbecomingness and the
charlatanism of an author's going around the country reading from
the proofs of a book he is about to publish are degrading to
literature. How Mr. Clemens could allow himself to do it is past
comprehension. Still, viewed in the light of the miserable
performance of Mr. Cable, he may feel that he is a benefactor, for
his recitals are so much superior to those from "Dr. Sevier." At
best it is very sad to see men who have done clever literary work,
"barn-storming" the country with their own works. If the works are
good, it is a lowering of the dignity of the authors that is
anything but commendable, and if they are not good, to read them in
public is almost a crime. It is true Dickens read his works on the
platform, but it never added to his fame, and it did lower him in
that he became general, common.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur15">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Quincy Review</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Mixed</keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Quincy Daily Herald</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: January 13</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">TWAIN AND CABLE.</font></b><br>
<br>
The audience that greeted Mark Twain and Geo. W. Cable, last
evening, was the largest that has been in the Opera house this
season. Every seat down stairs was occupied, and the gallery was
well filled. No one present went home dissatisfied. The
entertainment was enjoyable and appreciative throughout. The
programme consists of joint recitations, and the first part was
taken by Mr. Cable, who is a fine and intellectual gentleman. He
recited extracts from his work of "Dr. Sevier," perhaps the most
successful production he ever wrote. As a delineator of character
Mr. Cable is eminently successful. His dramatic power is intense.
In place of the fifth number of the programme he sang Creole songs
and was twice recalled.

<p>Mark Twain is almost the opposite of Mr. Cable. Tall and plain,
he is at once a favorite with the audience. His face begins to show
age, but his mind is the same fruitful and fertile one that it
always was. Every word he utters has a meaning, but while he keeps
his audience in paroxysms of laughter, scarcely a smile overcomes
his countenance. He was repeatedly applauded, and after each part
was recalled. He began by reciting some of the "Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn," and concluded with a bit of experience as an
editor at Virginia City. Should Mr. Cable or Mark Twain ever come
to Quincy again <a name="a">they will be</a> assured a good
house.</p>

<hr width="35%">
<center>
<h1><i>The (Quincy) Daily Journal</i></h1>
</center>

<center>1885: January 13</center>

<br>
 A very large and fashionable audience (drawn thither by the
celebrity of Mr. Clemens) greeted "Mark Twain" and Mr. Cable at the
Opera House last night, and were fairly well entertained.

<p>Mr. Cable is a small, weak, affected, effeminate-looking man
with a womanish voice. He is affected in dress and affected in
voice. He seems to be trying to imitate Mark Twain, in the matter
of a limping, halting, hesitating speech. The fact is that Mark
Twain has enough of this unvaluable eccentricity to answer all the
purposes of this combination.</p>

<p>Mr. Cable's first recitation was tiresome. It was nothing, very
long drawn out. It was all about a creole Frenchman borrowing a
dollar of an acquaintance.</p>

<p>His second recitation was a little better. He represented the
Irish woman in a fairly "amateurish" way. But there was not much to
it.</p>

<p>In his third appearance he sang some African Creole refrains
fairly well, as we think. This was the best number in the
programme.</p>

<p>He recited Mary Richling's ride at his fourth appearance. This
was a serious recitation, and was given about the average
school-boy fashion. Mr. Cable is no doubt an elegant and capable
writer, but as a reader he is sadly lacking in cultivation. There
is nothing fine, or finished, or artistic about his readings. Of
course he knows this, probably, better than anyone else. We mean
such fineness and such finish as was found in Forrest and Adams,
and as we find in Booth, and McCullough, and Barrett, and Mayo, and
Keane.</p>

<p>If Mr. Cable should attempt to make a tour of this country
alone, -- the third night would just about end him. Mark Twain can
hold him up for a long time, for Mark Twain is quite another sort
of man. Mark Twain is a sizeable, substantial, sensible,
manly-looking and manly-spoken fellow; a man cut after the pattern
of a man, and with the speech and action of a man; a capable,
brainy-looking fellow.</p>

<p>There is no discount in Twain's wit. It is there; and it is
genuine wit; and reader, let me tell you something! It is much
better in his books than it is on the stage -- much better. It is
condensed in his books. On the stage it is too long, too long drawn
out. Twain is too long in coming to a point, and he dwells on it
too long, after he does get to it. Wit and humor are a something
that surprises the mind. If the "point" of a joke can be
anticipated, the life is taken from the joke. It is the pleasant
surprise on a point that should be quickly touched and quickly
passed. He takes the charm and the sparkle from his funny point by
hanging it too long.</p>

<p>Twain's first recitation was his best -- by all means. In that
he didn't dwell. He drove straight ahead to the end of it. It was a
pleasant recitation. Twain's stories are funny, and he tells them
in a droll way.</p>

<p>To our notion the biggest part of the show was Mark Twain
himself. And when a man says "I saw Mark Twain last night," he has
said the largest thing that can be said about the whole affair.
Mark Twain is a famous character -- and there is something in human
nature that makes us wish to see famous characters. We cannot
conscientiously set a very high estimate upon the Twain-Cable
entertainment. To see Mark Twain is an event in itself; but no one
would particularly care to hear the Twain-Cable entertainment
repeated. Little, plain, simple, unpretending Bob Burdette gave an
entertainment at our opera house one night all by himself that
discounted the Twain-Cable entertainment one thousand per cent.
Bob's lecture was rich in wit and humor, and rich in pathos. It was
a feast of rich things.</p>

<p>We congratulate Dr. Marks upon the large attendance last night.
An audience like that adds to his wealth and cheers his
spirits.</p>

<center><font size="-1">TRANSCRIBED FROM</font> <i>Twins of
Genius</i> by Guy Cardwell</center>

<br>
<br>


<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a> &nbsp;
&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; <a href="../mtbib.html#6"><img
src="../mtbib.gif" alt="MT Bibliography"></a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur16">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Brooklyn Review</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1884 Lecture Twins Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Brooklyn Daily Eagle</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1884: November 23</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">FUN ON THE STAGE</font></b><br>
<b>Mark Twain and George W. Cable Entertain a Large Audience--<br>
The Academy of Music Packed to the Doors</b><br>
<br>
 A slimly built, dark whiskered man, the points of whose long and
somewhat straggling black mustache almost fell upon the collar of
his dress coat, faced the immense audience that filled up every
crevice and nook of the Academy of Music at 8 o'clock last evening,
and backed somewhat nervously against part of the elegant furniture
that had supplanted the ordinary properties of the stage. Mr.
George W. Cable was about to commence a recital of the adventures
of some of his characters in his novel of "Dr. Sevier." Mr. Cable's
manner as an elocutionist violates some of the canons of good
speaking, but his story is so spiritedly told by him that to his
audience the contempt of the conventionalities is lost sight of in
the interest of the narrative. Mr. Cable retired with a series of
profound bows that landed him exactly at the easterly corner of the
stage when he had finished. Three young ladies in the front seat
now nudged one another and some of the more elderly of the audience
prepared to listen to Mark Twain. The noted humorist, his hair
tinged with gray and a look of perfect innocence on his sharp New
England features, came forward amid the plaudits of the audience,
the young ladies in the front seats apparently losing all control
of themselves and clapping their hands until their faces glowed.
Twain has a peculiar way of looking sideways at his audience and at
the same time gently lifting up his left hand by the agency of his
right and scratching his well shaven chin meditatively. He
commenced by assuring his audience that he had had since he knew
anything a horror of the interviewer. "The principal reason of
that," he continued, "is that reporters have a peculiar way of
getting at facts which a man does not want to be known. Now, one of
these men came to see me one time after I had -- well, committed a
crime. What the crime was has entirely escaped my memory. I have no
mind to remember such things anyway. I made no note of it, but all
the same I did not want to see this interviewer. When he came to
see me I wrestled a long time with the problem of how to offset
him." The lecturer continued in this strain, amid the laughter of
his audience, and showed how he had completely befogged the
interviewer with a series of falsehoods that would knock any man
off his pins. His manner was inimitable, and no reproduction of his
mere words can convey any idea of the humor of the situation. The
audience was completely carried away, but amid all the laughter the
prickly halo of stubbly gray hair that fringes his forehead was
immovable. He was apparently incapable of emotion. The jolliest of
witticisms and the condensation of humor went forth from his lips,
but never a smile was to be seen on his countenance.

<p>Mr. Cable again regaled the audience with a chapter of "Dr.
Sevier," and effectually dissipated the impression, if such
prevails, that his work was intended as a mere makeweight to that
of Mr. Clemens. In response to an encore he sang a Creole song that
had been first heard on the banks of the Congo 150 years ago. It
was partially translated into a combination of barbaric French and
New Orleans African. When he had made his bow he backed against a
little pedestal on which a statue of Shakespeare rested. The Bard
of Avon trembled for a moment, and would have fallen to the ground
if Mr. Cable had not been equally ready with his hands as he had
been eloquent with his tongue. He introduced the statue as the late
Mr. Shakespeare. The laughter that greeted this joke was redoubled
as Mark Twain stepped forward and told the audience that he meant
to make an alteration in the programme. The next piece according to
that instrument was Buck Fanshaw's Funeral, but Mr. Clemens said
that he never did like funerals anyway. This funeral procession was
exploded in Brooklyn ten years ago he said, "and I will read
instead a scene from my new play, in which Colonel Mulberry Sellers
having failed in everything else tackles science as a last resort,
and proposes to utilize the wasted energies of the present race of
human beings in rehabilitating those who had gone over to the
majority. His friend Lafayette Hawkins, of Missouri, thinks that
there is no money in it, but the colonel takes policemen and shows
that model and best of all immortal patrolmen can be furnished at
nine cents apiece, and an exceptionally good article at $120 a
gross. A permanent set of dead Congressmen was suggested, and it
was said that Europe could be furnished with kings who could
actually eat dynamite. Charlemagne and Solomon could be sold at
auction, and the dead heroes of Greece and Rome would be worth
millions. "We will make a good sale," the colonel continued, "but I
must insist on no higgling about a million or two either way."</p>

<p>Mr. Clemens was recalled after this effort, and told his famous,
if somewhat antique, whistling story. Mr. Cable, with true pathos
and intense feeling, recited "The Fall of Orleans," from his novel,
"Dr. Sevier," and Mr. Clemens came forward to tell how he had lost
the editorship in a Nevada paper in the old time. This is one of
his best efforts, but all who have read his books are sufficiently
acquainted with it. The Southern problem was again wrestled with by
Mr. Cable, and Mr. Clemens entertained the audience with a ghost
story, that sent his auditors home to dream of golden arms, humbug
wounds and mysterious visitors. The matinee performance was equally
successful, if a little more restricted as to the topics touched
upon.</p>

<p>Mr. T.B. Sidebotham, Jr., the manager of this affair, has been
promised by Messrs. Twain and Cable that they will revisit Brooklyn
in the Spring, after their trip to California, and give one
performance.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur17">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable St. Paul Review</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Favorable</keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>Saint Paul Daily Dispatch</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: 24 January</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">MARK TWAIN AND CABLE.</font></b><br>
<br>
 Every chair in Market hall was occupied last evening. The
audience, fully half made up of ladies, was fairly representative
of St. Paul culture. The occasion was the first appearance in St.
Paul of Mark Twain, the humorist, and George W. Cable, the
novelist, in their literary Siamese-twin act. Mr. Cable came on the
stage first. He is a slight-built man, decidedly below the average
in stature, has small, twinkling, brownish-black eyes, features
almost femininely delicate, hair brushed carefully back from a
square forehead of medium height, small, graceful hands, and last
night wore a full, glossy black beard, with long, drooping
moustache of the same color, and a dress suit. Several persons were
entering the hall as Mr. Cable made his bow. He referred pleasantly
to the chronic habit of late coming in theater-goers, but begged
that the audience would try to devote a few moments from inspecting
the costumes of the late comers to the speaker on the stage. Mr.
Cable then read a chapter from his latest novel, "Dr. Sevier,"
throwing considerable expressive feeling into the delivery. The
reading occupied about twenty minutes, and the audience applauded
heartily. Mr. Cable bowed three times, and then made his escape to
the rear of the stage with a peculiar, pigeon-wing kind of
movement.

<p>Two or three minutes later Mark Twain came on. The audience
greeted him with a round of hearty hand-clapping. Twain wore his
habitually tired, unemotional look, and received the applause as
though it was something he had been accustomed to from infancy, but
was obliged to endure politely. He stepped quietly up to the desk
in the middle of the stage, placed his right hand upon it (the
desk), shoved his left hand down into his breeches' pocket, on the
left side, and looked as intensely weary as if he had just walked
in from Milwaukee and had not had time to get anything to eat
before coming on the stage. Any one ignorant of the humorist's
identity would have taken him for one of the chief mourners at a
well-regulated funeral, or a life-long victim of dyspepsia and
melancholia, in the acutest forms. He began business at once. His
voice was the same old, characteristic nasal drawl, in which the
public refused to see anything eloquent, or even pleasing, when he
essayed (unsuccessfully) to be a lecturer some ten years ago, but
which is now accepted as almost as convulsive as the humorist's
utterances themselves. Twain began last night by saying that the
first number on the program with which his name was mixed up was a
chapter from "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn," a new infliction
by himself. He went on to relate "King Sollermun," with which the
public is already familiar from having seen the anecdote in print
in the Century magazine and various newspapers. The audience
laughed and laughed and applauded heartily again at the close of
the reading.</p>

<p>The other selections were: "Kate Riley, Richling, and
Ristofalo," from "Dr. Sevier," by Mr. Cable; "Tragic Tale of the
Fishwife," Mark Twain; Creole folk-songs, Mr. Cable, and the story
of the "Woman With the Golden Arm," Mark Twain. The last named is a
ghost-story, which Twain brings abruptly to a close by jumping
toward the audience and crying "B-oo-o!" when the audience jumps,
too, and then goes home in the very best of humor.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur18">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Providence Review</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1884 Lecture Twins Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>Providence Daily Journal</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1884: November 10</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">Blackstone Hall.</font><br>
"MARK TWAIN" AND MR. CABLE.</b><br>
 Mr. Samuel L. Clemens and Mr. George W. Cable appeared at
Blackstone Hall on Saturday before two audiences as interpreters of
their own writings. Both these gentlemen have read in this city
before, and their appearance and style of delivery are known. In
the afternoon the audience filled about two-thirds of the sittings.
Mr. Cable's selections were from "Dr. Sevier," and included scenes
between Narcisse and Kate Riley, Narcisse and John Richling, when
the Creole was mourning the death of Lady Byron and endeavoring to
decide whether his obituary tribute should be poetic or prosaic in
form, and the courtship of Kate Riley by the Italian Ristofalo. Mr.
Cable was singularly successful, not only in tone and accent but in
pose and gesture in depicting the widely different characters, the
volatile Celtic widow, the sentimental Creole and the honest love
of the pleading Italian of few plain words. Mary Richling's ride
with the spy through both federal and confederate lines was Mr.
Cable's closing reading. The selection is a strong one and it was
read and acted with a force and realism seldom seen even on the
dramatic stage with the accessories of scenery. It must certainly
be regarded as a mark of talent little short of genius that a man
of Mr. Cable's pursuits can so completely obliterate himself by
conveying in rapid turns the whispers or hoarse commands of the
spy, the husky croak of the negro guide, the terrified cry of the
infant awakened by the shots of the sentries, and the agonizing
wail of the mother riding for life and her husband's bedside, as to
cause no rude shock in the listener. This selection may be deemed
the author's supreme effort on the platform. It was thrillingly
rendered. At its close he sang a Creole love song to <i>ma belle
p'tit' fille</i>, without accompaniment. The contrast with the
pathos of the preceding selection was too great, and the song fell
flat. The author noted this, and the second verse was much better
appreciated.

<p>Mr. Clemens ran his hand through his hair, and with a few
humorous remarks about the programme, calling for something he
hadn't at hand, proceeded to ignore it. He read the story of a
reporter's attempt to interview him, in which he solemnly stated
that either he or his twin brother was drowned in the bathtub in
infancy, which was never known, and also the account of his
experience as temporary editor of an agricultural weekly. An old
sea captain's story was well told, and in conclusion Mr. Clemens
narrated a ghost story about the woman with the golden arm, a story
similar to one of Uncle Remus's. It was like crooning a nursery
tale to adults; but it was well told, and was so well received as
to suggest that the Remus stories read by their author would find
appreciative listeners.</p>

<p>The hall was nearly filled by a select and cultured audience at
the evening entertainment. Mr. Cable appeared first, and rendered
several peculiar airs, illustrative of the "Songs of the Place
Congo." Mr. Clemens again took the liberty to change the selections
which had been announced for him, for the double reason, as he
stated in his characteristic manner, that he could not endure it to
be always bound down to a fixed course of action, and he also knew
that the audience would not endure to hear him read all that the
programme had set out for him. It would take until after breakfast
time next morning, and he was very particular about his breakfast.
And so the humorist repeated "The Tragic Tale of the Fishwife," a
suite upon the confounding of gender in German nouns. Mr. Clemens
was very cordially applauded, both on his first appearance and at
the end of each of his readings.</p>

<p>Mr. Cable gave selections from the familiar story of "Powson
Jone'." As usual he did not appear at his best at the outset of his
recitation, but gradually lost himself in the impersonations, and
then displayed that brilliant versatility in the dramatic
representation of entirely different characters, which is the
remarkable feature of his readings and which makes so realistic the
pictures he presents. The interview between that innocently artful
sophist, Jules St. Ange, and the repenting parson so overcome by
reflection on "My sins, Jools, my sins," in the calaboose, whither
the young Frenchman goes to liberate the West Floridian, was given
with consummate skill, and called forth hearty applause.</p>

<p>Mr. Clemens delighted the audience with some of the enthusiastic
and visionary projects of the famous "Col. Mulberry Sellers," for
the materialization of the waste human forces floating about in the
atmosphere, and only awaiting such a scientific genius as that of
Sellers to make them of incalculable benefit to the world at large,
while accumulating untold millions for the inventor. The humorist
introduced one variation for the occasion, which was greatly
appreciated and warmly applauded, being the proposition of Col.
Sellers to materialize voters and enter upon political life,
because the dead voters capable of materialization would so
outnumber the live ones that there would be no uncertainty as to
the result, and no waiting four or five days before we could find
out who was elected.</p>

<p>Mr. Clemens gave as his third selection "The Trying Situation,"
which was on the afternoon programme but was not read then, and
closed with the repetition of the story of the Golden Arm, of which
the startling denouement made a good share of the audience jump
perceptibly from their seats.</p>

<p>It is to be said that the "Twain"-Cable combination affords a
very agreeable and instructive entertainment. The distinguished
Louisiana novelist has fully sustained the favorable impression
which he made upon his Providence audiences, on the occasion of his
first visit here, last Spring, and the opportunity of hearing Mr.
Clemens, as the interpreter of his own humor, was highly
appreciated by the hosts of readers of his "health-promoting"
sketches. It was a matter of regret to the auditors that the
enunciation of Mr. Clemens was not at all times as distinct as it
might have been, but his manner and intonation in portraying the
situations of his various characters added to the pictures an
appreciation which printed pages along cannot afford.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur2">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable South Bend Review</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>South Bend Daily Tribune</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: February 5</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">The Twain-Cable Entertainment</font></b><br>
<br>
 Mark Twain, the great humorist and George Washington Cable, the
popular novelist, were greeted by a large and enthusiastic audience
at the opera house last night, and a better pleased people never
sat through a two hours' entertainment of any sort, in the
uncomfortable seats of the old hall. The character of the
entertainment, as announced, was readings by the two gentlemen from
their own and latest works. M. Cable appeared first, a man of small
stature and quite slender, in fact quite ordinary looking in every
respect, and with a voice of the high tenor pitch, but clear,
ringing, and rather pleasing in quality, introduced himself, made a
few sarcastic comments about the late comers to the entertainment,
begging those who were in their seats to go at least one eye on
him, with superintending the seating of the tardy ones with the
other, and having placed his hearers on good humor from the start,
proceded to recite a chapter from his novel, Dr. Sevier,
personating three characters in very acceptable style. After he had
retired with the approval of the audience, Mark Twain sauntered
upon the stage in his easy careless manner, with a grave look upon
his countenance, and as he stood for a moment glancing sidewise at
the audience, of course there was a general outburst of laughter
from all parts of the house. After it had subsided Twain proceded
in his dry, comical way to recite from his latest work, "The
Adventures of Huckleberry Finn," and kept his listeners in a roar
all through. His appearance and style is directly the opposite of
Cable's. Tall, somewhat angular, with a shock of grizzly hair
covering a large head, a smoothly shaven face, with the exception
of a gray and stubby mustache under a large Roman nose, and over a
wide ranging mouth, with a voice low and guttural in tone, a
serious, solemn look ever resting upon his features, he is the
embodiment of all that is droll and laughable. The witty things in
his writings, over which so many thousands have shed tears of
laughter time and time again, sound all the more comical when
repeated by the author in his inimitable style. During the evening
he told his story of trying to master the German language, doing
his trip abroad, his adventures with Harris in Switzerland, the
stuttering yarn, and wound up with the old darkey ghost story. Mr.
Cable also appeared in other selections from his novel, Dr. Sevier,
and displayed a very fine musical taste and a sweet voice by
singing two old Creole songs. His last selection, "Mary's Ride," a
thrilling discription of an adventure of a southern woman during
the late war, was his best effort of the evening, and was given in
a decidedly dramatic style that called forth the most enthusiastic
applause.

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur3">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Milwaukee Review</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The (Milwaukee) Sentinel</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: January 29</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">Mark Twain and George W. Cable at the
Academy.</font></b><br>
<br>
 Mark Twain and George W. Cable appeared at the Academy of Music
last night in the presence of a small but delighted audience. The
programme was made up of selections from the writings of the two
well-known authors. Mr. Cable's readings were from his recent
novel, Dr. Sevier, and were listened to with the greatest interest.
Mr. Cable has a clear and distinct voice and speaks with almost
painful slowness, putting a careful emphasis on each syllable and
apparently weighing well all his utterances. He does not possess a
commanding stage presence, nor is his voice particularly strong,
yet the modesty of his demeanor makes a good impression and he
makes friends as he proceeds. With Mark Twain it is different. The
celebrated humorist is no less modest than his younger confrere,
but he is more at home on the stage. He walks on with a careless
shambling gait, tells the most uproariously funny stories in his
inimitable way, without the faintest shadow of a smile crossing his
countenance, and retires with the same air of careless
indifference. His selections from the advance sheets of his new
story, "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn," were heartily
received, but it was not until he gave his "Tragic Tale of a
Fishwife," leading up to it with an exquisitely humorous
description of the difficulties he encountered in an attempt to
master the grammar of the German language, that the audience fully
appreciated his quaint drollery. The laughter was incessant and it
increased in force as he graphically described his meeting with an
acquaintance whom he had forgotten, but who remembered him. His
terrible mental agony was depicted with all the force of the
genuine humorist, and drew forth roars of laughter. Mr. Cable
rendered a number of Creole songs and recited "Mary's Night Ride"
with remarkable dramatic intensity. Before commencing the
recitation he said that the story of the life of <i>John</i> and
<i>Mary Richling</i> had been told him by a friend. <i>Mary's</i>
home had been in Milwaukee, and it was to Milwaukee she had come in
the midst of her trouble, leaving her husband to battle so manfully
alone in New Orleans. It was from Milwaukee she started out so
bravely to reach her husband in the trying times of the war. He had
looked forward to a visit to the city which had been the home of
his heroine, with a hope that he might grasp the hand of that noble
woman. Following is the programme for to-night:<br>
Narcisse in the Inundation.............................Geo. W.
Cable<br>
Desperate Encounter with an Interviewer......Mark Twain<br>
A Sound of Drums........................................Mr.
Cable<br>
Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer's Brilliant Achievement.....Mark Twain<br>
Raoul Innerarity Exhibits His Picture.............Mr. Cable<br>
The Jumping Frog.........................................Mark
Twain<br>
Mary's Night Ride.........................................Mr.
Cable<br>
Selection.......................................................Mark
Twain

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur4">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Cincinnati Reviews</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Mixed </keyword> --><font
size="+1">[<i>The Twins gave three performances in Cincinnati:
Friday evening, 2 January, a Saturday matinee, 3 January, and again
Saturday evening. The</i> Enquirer <i>reviewed the two evening
performances separately.</i>]</font><br>
<br>


<center>
<h2><i>The (Cincinnati) Enquirer</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: January 3</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">TWAIN AND CABLE.</font><br>
A Splendid House Meets Tham on Their First Appearance</b><br>
<br>
 Ennuied theater-goers, sated with "patent insides" plays like
somebody or other's Confectionery, the Work-house Convict, Stuffed
Doll, Skipped by Daylight, Consternation, and similar productions,
found infinite relief last night listening to the readings given by
Mark Twain and Geo. W. Cable. They must have felt flattered by the
audience that greeted them, for, in addition to being of goodly
size, it was made up of the best of society people. Cable was the
first to appear. He is small, dapper, and so slight that his dress
suit clings rather than fits to his frame. After being introduced
he seated himself at one of the tables on the stage and waited
until the late comers had been shown their chairs. His colorless
face, encircled with abundance of dark hair, did not suggest
risible tendencies, and his long pointed beard, suggestive of a
cheap stage make-up for the villain's part, was also against his
present calling. Taken altogether, he had the look of an overworked
student who was cultivating brain at the expense of physique. When
silence obtained he came forward and began the entertainment in a
disappointing voice, for it was weak, effeminate, and thin, and had
a metallic quality that could scarcely be called agreeable.
Throughout the evening his selections were entirely from one of his
own works, the name of which was prominently displayed at the
beginning of every one of his numbers on the programme, the text
following it in smaller type. Either the man is infatuated with his
own work or takes this means of bolstering its sale. Ill-advisors
have put him forward as a humorist lecturer when the pathetic is
far better suited to his abilities. On several occasions this fact
was proved, and in "Mary's Night Ride" he reached a point bordering
on the tragic. As he reached the climax in this selection his words
were delivered with a dramatic effect so thrilling as to send cold
chills through every listener. He was heartily applauded for this
and had to answer a recall, as on a former occasion, when he gave
three quaint little creole songs, of singular and haunting tune.
Reciting the English words first, he followed with the Creole
patois original in a wierdly musical voice. In strong contrast to
Mr. Cable, Mark Twain is tall, awkward, gestureless, with a shock
head of iron-gray hair and a deeply-furrowed, tired face. With all
these rostrum disadvantages, he enters upon the stage,
nevertheless, with the self-possessed ease of a man passing into
his own drawing-room. The look upon his features suggests that he
has mislaid his eye-glasses and has returned to look for them.
Finding a number of persons present, he stops and has a long talk
with them, during which they are the most willing listeners in the
world. To describe his voice is almost next to impossible. Persons
who have heard Frank Mayo can form something like an idea of its
peculiarities. It is a thoroughly down East nasal tone, flowing
with the steadiness of a brook in words that, though scarcely
separated, are perfectly distinct and rich in their delicious
drollery. There is not a sentence but what conceals a
mirth-provoker of some kind, that jumps out at the most unexpected
time and place. Concluding his remarks, he ambles off the stage
with a funny little trot, as if he was wild to get out of sight as
soon as possible to have a roar all by himself.

<p>Last night's programme will be repeated this afternoon. To-night
will be given the closing entertainment, at which the programme
will be --</p>

<blockquote>From Dr. Sevier -- Narcisse's views on Chirography;
Raoul Innerarity announces his marriage -- George W. Cable.<br>
Certain Personal Episodes -- Mark Twain.<br>
From the Grandissimes -- Selection -- George W. Cable<br>
Why I Lost the Editorship -- Mark Twain<br>
From Dr. Sevier -- Mary's Night Ride -- Geo. W. Cable<br>
Selection -- <a name="a">Mark Twain</a></blockquote>

<hr width="35%">
<center>
<h1><i>The (Cincinnati) Enquirer</i></h1>
</center>

<center>1885: January 4</center>

<br>
<b><font size="+1">ANOTHER DELIGHTED AUDIENCE.</font><br>
Twain and Cable Close Their Season in Cincinnati</b><br>
<br>
 There was another fine audience at the Odeon last evening to hear
Mark Twain and George W. Cable on their last appearance in this
city. Mr. Cable was first to appear, at eight o'clock, when he read
an interesting humorous selection from Dr. Sevier, which was
applauded so enthusiastically that he continued the story. Mark
Twain then commenced to tell how he was interviewed in such a
humorous way that his audience at first thought he was only telling
something incidentally before he began his reading. In his next
selection he read a chapter of his unpublished book "Huckleberry
Finn," explaining how "Huck" and "Tom Sawyer" freed the runaway
"nigger," which created roars of laughter. He concluded his part of
the programme with the most side-splitting part of the
entertainment, an incident detailing his duelling experience in the
West. The audience fairly roared during the recital.

<p>Mr. Cable's second number on the programme indicated that he
would give a selection from the "Grandissime," but he substituted
another scene from Dr. Sevier, which the audience seemed to enjoy.
He became highly dramatic in this scene. In his closing selection
he, with the consent of the audience, rendered two of his weird
Creole songs instead of another -- "Mary's Night Ride" -- from Dr.
Sevier. The lecturers' engagement in this city has been a success
financially, and the entertainments have been highly satisfactory
to all who attended.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur6">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Madison Review (1)</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Favorable</keyword> -->
<center>
<h2>The <i>Madison Democrat</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: January 22</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">Fun at the Methodist Church.</font></b><br>
<br>
 Mark Twain and Geo. W. Cable entertained a crowded house at the
Methodist church last evening. The audience was kept in a continual
roar of laughter for two hours and went home with the assurance
that the "troop," as Mark Twain called it, would return to Madison
on the 27th of this month.

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur7">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Madison Review (2)</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2>The <i>Madison Democrat</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: January 28</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">Last Night's Amusements.</font></b><br>
<br>
 At the Methodist church Mark Twain and Geo. W. Cable entertained a
goodly audience for two hours, with their joint readings. They were
both very clever all the way through. The programme was an
excellent one; entirely different from the one presented on their
appearance a week or more ago.

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur8">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Chicago Review (2)</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2>The <i>Chicago Tribune</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: February 3</center>

<br>
<center><b>Twain and Cable.</b></center>

<p>A large audience again met George W. Cable and Mark Twain at
Central Music Hall last night, leaving only a few seats vacant on
the outskirts of the hall. Mr. Cable's recitations again received
intelligent and smiling consideration, while Mr. Clemens convulsed
the house with uncontrollable mirth. His account of the runaway
slave's escape from the log cabin under the auspices of Tom Sawyer
and Huckleberry Finn was irresistible. There will be another
reading tonight.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twintur9">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Columbus Review</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Favorable</keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>Columbus Daily Times</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: February 10</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">TWAIN-CABLE.</font></b><br>
<br>
 One of the largest and it is certain, the most appreciative
audiences of the season assembled last night to hear the readings
of "Mark Twain" (S.L. Clemens) and George W. Cable. The constant
and convulsive laughter of the audience displayed that it needed no
extra effort of these well-known authors to hold their listeners'
attention. Their selections in themselves did that. The inimitable
sketches of Mark Twain and their equally mirth-provoking author,
combined with the bright and spicy extracts by Mr. Cable from his
"Dr. Sevier," made an entertainment that would be hard to be
equaled. Everything they gave was so original that it would be a
difficult task to decide which should claim the greatest merit.

<p>The "Tragic Tale of the Fishwife" by Mark Twain probably
occasioned the most laughter, and as its vein of fun is of a
character that has been pronounced to be beyond parallel, it
deserved all the applause it gained. The house was filled with the
best of Columbus people, and the gentlemen who entertained them
should recognize the decided compliment thus conveyed.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twinturx">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Detroit Review (2)</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2>The <i>Detroit Post</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: February 13</center>

<br>
<p>The "Mark Twain"-Cable readings drew a large audience to
Whitney's last night, a good proportion being composed of those who
enjoyed the readings of the two authors here in December last. Of
the two Mr. Cable is not near as good a raconteur as Mr. Clemens,
although he assumes much more of the manner of the professional
elocutionist. Mr. Cable's selection most pleasing and most
applauded was "Mary's Last Ride," which was narrated in a graphic
manner. He sang, too, the negro boat and love songs admirably.
"Mark Twain"--he should petition the legislature to legally entitle
him to wear his nom de plume for every day use--has that peculiar
sense of humor so dear to the American heart, which finds
expression in the wildest flights of mendacity, or in a gentle
burlesquing of the truth. His manner heightens the effect of
everything he says, because it seems to be utterly unfitted for
public readings, and yet it is thoroughly artistic, and entirely
appropriate to whatever character he represents as speaking.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="twntur19">
<head>
<title>Twain-Cable Keokuk Review</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1885 Lecture Twins Midwestern FAVORABLE </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The (Keokuk) Daily Gate City</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1885: January 15</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">TWAIN-CABLE.</font></b><br>
<br>
 Mark Twain's characteristic introduction of himself last night at
its close shaped itself into an apology for his having been the
cause of bringing from pleasant homes and cheerful firesides the
large audience that assembled at the opera house last night. We
venture the assertion, however, that every one present felt fully
repaid for the discomfort experienced in fighting their way through
the fiercest snow storm of the season by the excellence of the
entertainment furnished them by Mark Twain who certainly is
entitled to rank as our foremost humorist and George W. Cable, the
distinguished southern novelist. Mr. Cable was first upon the
program and gave a reading from Dr. Sevier, but unfortunately the
greatest portion of it was lost to the audience by reason of the
interruptions caused by the late comers. Mark Twain came next and
the appearance of the ungainly body and the shaggy head was the
signal for applause. He remarked after the performance that he had
grown handsomer of late. If this is the fact, and it is generally
understood that Twain is truthful, we feel grateful that he didn't
appear before us in his previous condition. As far as looks are
concerned Twain would never capture a premium at a beauty show, but
when it comes to story telling the best judges would pronounce him
chief. He called the audience friends and fellow townsmen, told
them he was glad to resume an intercourse that had been broken off
years ago, said he was sorry to have been the cause of bringing
them out upon such a night, but that they were no worse off than
the people of some seventy-five cities already visited by them this
season, that a storm generally preceded their coming, and that if
feeling well they always left a famine behind them. After this, as
a sort of introduction and preliminary, he waded into an extract
from his new book and caused many a laugh by his funny description
of the discussion of the merits of and demerits of "King Sollermun"
between the darkey Jim and Huckleberry Finn.

<p>Mr. Cable's next reading was from Dr. Sevier also and dealt with
Kate Riley, Richling and Ristofalo, the latter part of it being
devoted to the wooing of the widow by the Italian and was given in
a decidedly clever manner. Mark Twain then convulsed the audience
with a side-splitting history of his tussle with the German
language and his lamentable failure to properly declare their
adjectives or master the intricacies of the gender of their nouns.
Being recalled he told his very funny stuttering story and another
being demanded he spun a sailor yarn to the entire satisfaction of
the audience.</p>

<p>For the regular number on the program Mr. Cable at this point
substituted several pleasing Creole songs which were well received.
Twain then gave "a Trying Situation" which was followed by Mr.
Cable in a descriptive reading. He had kept his best for the last
and his dramatic rendition of "Mary's Night Ride" won for him most
heart applause. The performance was closed with a personal
reminiscence by Mark Twain detailing his experience with the duello
in his days of roughing it in the rowdy west.</p>

<center><a href="tourschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="vandrev1">
<head>
<title>Mrs. Fairbanks Reviews the Vandal</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1868 Lecture Vandal Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<h1>The Cleveland Herald<br>
18 November 1868</h1>

<p>[<i>The first of the three Cleveland reviews was written by Mrs.
Mary Fairbanks, the wife of the publisher of the</i> Herald<i>, and
the woman MT addressed as "Mother." He met her on the</i> Quaker
City <i>trip, and almost immediately put himself up for adoption as
her "Prodigal Son." He premiered the "American Vandal" lecture in
Cleveland so that his lecture tour could begin under her auspices.
The review she wrote was apparently very influential in convincing
other midwestern towns to engage MT as a lecturer.</i>]</p>

<p>The course of lectures before the Library Association was
inaugurated last evening by the brilliant entertainment of the
humorist "Mark Twain." Notwithstanding the unpropitious weather,
and strong competition of counter attractions in the way of
amusements, Case Hall was early filled with an assembly who were
prepared to criticize closely this new candidate for their favor. A
few moments sufficed to put him and his audience on the best of
terms, and to warm him up with the pleasant consciousness of their
approval. For nearly two hours he held them by the magnetism of his
varied talent.</p>

<p>We shall attempt no transcript of his lecture, lest with
unskillful hands we mar its beauty, for beauty and poetry it
certainly possessed, though the production of a profound
humorist.</p>

<p>We know not which to commend, the quaint utterances, the funny
incidents, the good-natured recital of the characteristics of the
harmless "Vandal," or the gems of beautiful descriptions which
sparkled all through his lecture. We expected to be amused, but we
were taken by surprise when he carried us on the wings of his
redundant fancy, away to the ruins, the cathedrals, and the
monuments of the Old World. There are some passages of gorgeous
word painting which haunt us like a remembered picture.</p>

<p>We congratulate Mr. Twain upon having taken the tide of public
favor "at the flood" in the lecture field, and having conclusively
proved that a man may be a humorist without being a clown. He has
elevated his profession by his graceful delivery and by recognizing
in his audience something higher than merely a desire to laugh. We
can assure the cities who await his coming that a rich feast is in
store for them and Cleveland is proud to offer him the first laurel
leaf, in his role as lecturer this side of the "Rocky-slope."</p>

<hr width="55%">
<center><img src="plaindlr.jpg" alt=
"cleveland daily plain leader, 18 November 1869"></center>

<br>
<p>The most popular American humorist since the demise of poor
Artemus, made his first bow to a Cleveland public, as a lecturer,
last evening, at Case Hall. Mark Twain has reason to feel a
gratified pride at the pleasant and satisfactory impression he made
upon his immense audience. The "American Vandal Abroad" was the
title of a slightly incoherent address of between one and two
hour's duration -- mingling the most irresistible humor with little
flights of eloquence, and making up an entertainment of which it
were impossible to tire. The "Vandal" was the type of careless,
dry, Yankee tourist, who never lost his equanimity, or coolness, no
matter what his situation might be. He looked at a manuscript of
Christopher Columbus, with the most infernal sang froid --
remarking that it didn't amount to much as a specimen of
penmanship; there were school boys in his country, who could beat
it. The vandal, in order that he may the better appreciate
Columbus, is told by the guide that he discovered America. "Guess
not," says he, "I have just come from America, and I heard nothing
about it!" He examines a mummy. To the guide -- "What did I
understand you to say was the name of the gentleman?" The guide
perspires, and explains that the diseased died some 3,000 years
ago. "Ah," sighs the vandal, "are his parents living?" The Vandal
is an untiring relic hunter. He got along very well till he arrive
in the Crimea; there relics were scarce. He finally found the hip
bone of a horse, on the field of the Alma, however, which was
gobbled up and labeled -- "Jawbone of a Russian general." The
apostrophe to the Sphinx was really beautiful; and when the speaker
would up with a sketch of the imperturbable Vandal who so coolly
whistled in its shade, the house "came down["]. We have given two
or three "specimen bricks." Mr. Clemmen's manner very much enhanced
the effect of his remarks -- there is a dry, comical drawl in his
voice, that is irresistible in a funny story. He should speak
louder, however; those in the rear of the hall lost many of his
good things.</p>

<center><img src="../huckfinn/clleader.jpg" alt=
"cleveland daily leader, 18 November 1869"></center>

<br>


<p>M<font size="-1">ARK</font> T<font size="-1">WAIN</font>. -- A
very large audience assembled in Case Hall last evening to hear
Mark Twain lecture. It is a dangerous thing for a man who has made
a reputation as a writer to enter the field of lecturing, but as
Mr. Clemens' manner corresponds completely with his dry, off-hand
style of wit he has perhaps suffered nothing in reputation by
appearing before the lecture-going poet [sic] as a candidate for
its plaudits. His subject was the "American Vandal Abroad," and he
portrayed the <i>nonchalance</i>, dignity and independence of that
large class of Americans traveling in Europe, and known at home as
"shoddy," with truth and in a humorous way. The discourse, however,
was not altogether facetious. At times there were passages which
were grand indeed and in the delivery of which the lecturer became
eloquent. The lecture course of the literary association has thus
had a most auspicious beginning and we hope to see every
entertainment as liberally patronized. Next week Mr. J. E. Murdoch,
the celebrated elocutionist, will give some miscellaneous
readings.</p>

<center><a href="vandschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="vandrev2">
<head>
<title>Chicago Tribune Reviews Vandal</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1869 Lecture Vandal Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center><img src="vandrev2.jpg" alt=
"Chicago Tribune, 8 January 1869"></center>

<br>
<center><font size="+2"><b>MARK TWAIN.</b></font></center>

<hr width="40%">
<center><font size="+1"><b>The "American Vandal
Abroad"</b></font></center>

<hr width="25%">
<p>Mark Twain, the well-known humorist, lectured last evening at
Library Hall, under the auspices of the Young Men's Library
Association, on the "American Vandal Abroad." He first pitched into
the guides who beset and betray American travellers in Europe, then
went on to give a ludicrous history of Columbus and an Egyptian
mummy, to which he was introduced at Genoa and Rome, respectively.
He smoked the narghali in Turkey, inspected the wall where St. Paul
was let down in the basket which was sold for firewood, went to the
pyramids, where he took dinner or something else, with the resident
mummy, and whistled "Auld Lang Syne" on the Rock of Gibraltar. He
did not think much of the mummies, but preferred a "fresh corpse."
The "Grand Quaker City Holy Land funeral excursion" and the Vandal,
a doctor, or "body snatcher," on board, were introduced and warmly
received with laughter by the audience. A sailor, who was afflicted
with an attack of "horizontal parallax," got from the doctor a
recipe of four shovelsful of laudanum four times a day, and a
mustard plaster about the size of a saddle, across the small of his
back, the laudanum to put him asleep and the blister to waken him
up. The vandal was also in Paris looking at the <i>can-can</i> and
the accompaniments. The pretense of understanding the French
language made by Americans was ably satirized. There were several
relic-hunters in the ship. At the Crimea one of them found the jaw
bone of a horse, took it aboard the ship, put it among his
collection, and labelled it "the jaw bone of a Russian General." At
Milan they captured the cathedral and were captivated by a "freshly
skinned" man, with whom they exchanged cards. The Vandal also
caught trout in Lake Como and then went off the Venice with the
fish, where he got a good price for them on the Rialto, and with
the proceeds paid for a ride in a gondoller of the neuter gender on
the grand canal, from which they got a grand view of the palaces,
&amp;c. The young ladies in Venice have their back hair done up in
"cruppers," somewhat like the Chicago beauties. The Venetian belles
get their shopping sent home in "scows." The hackmen drive their
teams in the water. At Padua he broke off the big toe of Romeo and
Juliet for a relic, and then went to Bologna to investigate the
manufacture of sausages. He put up at Naples, next lit his cigar at
the flame of Vesuvius, and breathed the successor to the air of
Demosthenes on the Acropolis at Athens or somewhere else. The
atmosphere of Greece is as clear as the nose of a man with a cold
in his head. The Vandal visited his friend, the Emperor of Russia,
took breakfast with his brother; was taken with the premises he
occupied, and finally, after inviting the Russian Czar to call upon
him at No. 404 Seventh Avenue, San Francisco, took himself off, as
he could not bear to prolong the affecting interview. After hoping
the houses of the audience would not take fire, he bid them good
night, and concluding by saying that, "considering the manner in
which juries in Chicago are constituted, I hope there is nothing
libelous in anything I have said." [Applause and laughter.] Mr.
Twain then retired.</p>

<p>Mark Twain (Samuel G. Clemens), is a gentleman of some
notoriety, and his effusions are constantly making the rounds of
the press. The following sketch will be interesting to those who
have not the pleasure of his acquaintance: Blessed with long legs,
he is tall, reaching five feet ten inches in his boots; weight, 167
pounds; body lithe and muscular; head round and well set on
considerable neck, and feet of no size within the ken of a
shoemaker, so he gets his boots and stockings always made to order.
Next to Grant he wears the belt for smoking. He smokes tobacco.
Drink never crosses the threshold of his humorous mouth. Fun lurks
in the corners of it. The eyes are deep set and twinkle like stars
in a dark night. The brow overhangs the eyes, and the head is
protected from the weather by dark and curling locks. The face is
eminently a good one, a laughing face, beaming with humor and
genuine good nature. He looks as if he would make a good husband
and a jolly father. As a humorous lecturer, he is a success. There
is nothing in his lectures, for he very properly sacrifices
everything to make his audience roar, and they do it. His manner is
peculiar; he hangs round loose, leaning on the desk, or flirting
round the corners of it; then marching and counter-marching in the
rear of it, marking off ground by the yard with his tremendous
boots. He would laugh at his own jokes, but that his doing so would
detract from the fun of his hearers, so he contents himself by
refusing to explode, and swallowing his risibility until the
lecture is over, when he feels easier, and blows off steam. His
voice is a long monotonous drawl, well adapted to his style of
speaking. The fun invariably comes in at the end of a sentence,
after a pause. When the audience least expects it, some dry remark
drops and tickles the ribs, and endangers the waist buttons of the
"laughists." During the evening, as if to prove that there was
something besides humor in him, he branched out into quite eloquent
passages, which were applauded. The lecture was good and the
attendance large.</p>

<br>
<center><a href="vandschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="vandrev3">
<head>
<title>Free Press Reviews American Vandal</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1868 Lecture Vandal Midwestern Mixed </keyword> -->
<center><img src="detrtfp.jpg" alt=
"Detroit Free Press, 23 December 1868"></center>

<center><b>Mark Twain.</b></center>

<p>Last evening Young Men's Hall was densely crowded with one of
the largest audiences of the season, to listen to Mark Twain in his
new <i>role</i> of comic lecturer. Of course all were intensely
amused at his droll sayings, but it is perhaps safe to say that his
capabilities as a writer are far in advance of his powers as a
lecturer. The lecture itself was decidedly good, but its delivery
was not what might have been expected, an assumed drawl, though
very taking and appropriate at times, spoiling the effect of many
of the finest sentences. Some of the more serious passages were of
the most brilliant order, but their effect was sadly marred by the
failing already alluded to. The allusion to the Sphynx is a
striking illustration of this:</p>

<p>"The great face was so sad, so earnest, so longing, so patient.
There was a dignity not of earth in its mien, and in its
countenance a benignity such as never any thing human wore. It was
stone, but it seemed sentient! If ever image of stone thought, it
was thinking. It was looking toward the verge of the landscape, but
looking at nothing--nothing but distance and vacancy. It was
looking over and beyond every thing of the present, and far into
the past. It was gazing out over the ocean of time--over lines of
century-waves which, further and further receding, closed nearer
and nearer together, and blended at last into one unbroken tide,
away toward the horizon of a remote antiquity.</p>

<p>It was thinking of the wars of departed ages--of the empires it
had seen created and destroyed--of the nations whose birth it had
witnessed, whose progress it had watched, whose annihilation it had
noted--of the joy and sorrow, the life and death, the grandeur and
decay, of five thousand slow revolving years.</p>

<p>"It was the type of an attribute of man--of a faculty of his
heart and brain. It was M<font size="- 1">EMORY</font>--R<font
size="-1">ETROSPECTIVE</font>--wrought into visible, tangible form.
All who know what pathos there is in memories of days that are
accomplished and faces that have vanished--albeit only a trifling
score of years gone by--will have some appreciation of the pathos
that dwells in these grave eyes that look so steadfastly back upon
the things they knew before history was born--before tradition had
being--things that were, and forms that moved, in a vague era which
even poetry and romance scarce know of--and passed one by one away
and left the stony dreamer solitary in the midst of a strange new
age, and uncomprehended scenes!</p>

<p>"The Sphynx is grand in its loneliness; it is imposing in its
magnitude; it is impressive in the mystery that hangs over its
story. And there is that in the overshadowing majesty of this
eternal figure of stone, with its accusing memory of the deeds of
all ages, which reveals to one something of what he shall feel when
he stands at last in the awful presence of God!"</p>

<br>
<center><a href="vandschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="vandrev4">
<head>
<title>Newark Advertiser Reviews Vandal</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1868 Lecture Vandal Eastern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center><img src="newarkia.jpg" alt=
"Newark Daily Advertiser, 10 December 1868"></center>

<p>M<font size="-1">ARK</font> T<font size="-1">WAIN</font>
delivered the second lecture of the Clayonian course last evening,
in the Opera House, to a very large and attentive audience. His
subject was "Brother Jonathan Abroad." He explained, by way of
introduction, that while the educated Americans who travel abroad
are accustomed upon their return home to write descriptions of
their journeys for the benefit of their friends and to moralize in
books and lectures upon what they have seen, the "Vandal" (and he
desired to be respectful in the use of the term, which he
interpreted to mean those travellers whose pockets were heavier
than their store of learning or historical research), had no such
opportunity for a multiplicity of reasons, the chief of which was a
want of early education. He therefore volunteered to be their
historian, having been a close observer of their habits.</p>

<p>The lecturer then described in a most humorous manner, the
ramblings of the "American vandal," what he saw and how he was
impressed by the exhibitions of ancient grandeur or influenced by
old historical surroundings and associations. In the course of his
remarks he painted in glowing language and with choice words scenes
of cities and places and of statues and paintings, that will be
slow to fade from the memories of the audience. Chief among them
were descriptions of Venice, of Athens by moonlight from the
Acropolis, of Damascus, the most ancient metropolis, of the Sphinx,
which has looked upon thousands of years of history with its stony
eyes yet reveals nothing, and of the picture galleries of Rome and
Milan. These were clothed in the beautiful rhetoric of poetry in
prose. In the humorous parts the speaker resembled Artemus Ward in
his slow and quaint way of saying very amusing things. The audience
was constantly convulsed with laughter, and was continued in its
happy humor by quiet touches of wit and sentiment. Altogether it
was a most enjoyable evening's entertainment.</p>

<br>
<a href="vandschd.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="vandrev5">
<head>
<title>Indianapolis Journal Reviews Vandal</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1869 Lecture Vandal Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center><img src="indiania.jpg" alt=
"Indianapolis Journal, 5 January 1869"></center>

<center><b>January 5, 1869</b></center>

<p>M<font size="-1">ARK</font> T<font size="-1">WAIN AS A</font>
L<font size="-1">ECTURER</font>.--To say that the audience that
listened to Mark Twain's lecture, at the Metropolitan last night,
was well pleased would be saying what every man and woman present
will attest; but every one would also say that those two words are
so far from properly representing the pleasure afforded, that in
their very tameness they seem to underrate its real value. It is so
common now-a-days to apply high sounding adjectives to all manner
of entertainments, whether of merit or not, that we avoid their use
in noticing the lecture of Mark Twain, in order that it may not be
ranked by our readers along with the very "flat, stale and
unprofitable" productions, that pass under ponderous adjectives for
lectures worth hearing. The impression made on the hearer by the
first few sentences of the lecturer is anything but favorable.
There is in the careless and effortless manner of dropping words as
though they rolled from the speaker's mouth half moulded as it
were, and the lazy roll of the head, a strong indication that he is
to be bored by a commonplace recital of incidents of travel abroad,
interspersed with a few jokes that would be much more enjoyable in
print, than as mumbled by the speaker. The awakening from this
error comes so suddenly, so thoroughly, and so pleasantly too, that
from this point to the close of the lecture, the doubter at first,
is a willing and delighted captive; drinking in every word, gliding
with the lecturer among the thousand gondolas floating on the water
ways of moonlit Venice, laughing at his proofs that the girls of
Venice are like the girls of Indianapolis, answering with applause
that he would not if he could withhold the thrilling and
surpassingly beautiful descriptions of Athens by moonlight, of the
cathedrals of Milan, and Rome, and St. Petersburg; and then again
laughing himself into tears over the peculiarly happy of the bold,
unceremonious, care-for-nothing, rollicking conduct of the American
vandal, who never fails to make known his nationality, whether in
stocking feet inspecting the interior of a Turkish mosque, among
thousands of worshipping Moslems, attending the <i>fetes</i> of
Emperors or autocrats, rambling among the grand and inspiring ruins
of Athens, or whistling a national air as he views the towering
Pyramids of Egypt.</p>

<p>Mark Twain's wit is always of the highest order, and the more
enjoyable in that it so truthfully hits off some peculiarity of
human nature. His descriptions of scenery, in a literary point of
view, glitter with the polish of culture, and captivate by the
beauty and smoothness of the verbiage. His reading of the
descriptive passages is peculiarly adapted to the display of their
beauties. He reads as one who is not laboring to convey the
impression that he is saying something beautiful, but as one who is
laboring rather to convey to the hearer a correct idea of the
beauties that impressed him. The reader of his prose would discover
in it the music of poetry; but as he reads it, it has all <i>
that</i> charm, and the additional interest that a story has,
coming from the lips of one who saw whereof he speaks.</p>

<br>
<a href="vandschd.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="vandrev6">
<head>
<title>How MT Played in Peoria</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1869 Lecture Vandal Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center><img src="peoriand.jpg" alt=
"Peoria National Democrat, 12 January 1869"></center>

<br>
<p>T<font size="-1">WAIN'S</font> L<font size="-1">ECTURE</font>.
-- Mark Twain, (Clemens,) held forth to a full house in Rouse's
Opera House last evening. The house was a full as comfort would
allow. His subject, "The American Vandal Abroad," suggested
something of reproof, but the wit and humor that tempered the
speech made every one forget everything but that. The public owe
the lecture committee thanks for providing for them such an
entertainment. They have begun well. Let them keep on in the ways
of well doing and they will find their account in the full houses
and plethoric treasury which will be secured them. We give them
credit for <i>one</i>.</p>

<br>


<center><img src="../tomsawye/peoria.jpg" alt=
"Peoria Daily Transcript, 12 January 1869"></center>

<br>
<center><font size="+1"><b>Mark Twain's
Lecture.</b></font></center>

<p>The second regular lecture of the Library Course was delivered,
last evening, by Samuel Clemens, popularly known as "Mark Twain,"
the humorist, who became known to the public a few years ago as a
correspondent of the <i>Alta Californian</i> of San Francisco, and
who is now employed on the editorial staff of the New York <i>
Tribune</i>. His subject was "The American Vandal Abroad."</p>

<p>He was introduced by E.W. Coy. The lecturer accompanied the
Quaker City expedition to the Bermudas, Paris, the Crimea,
Constantinople, Palestine, and various points on the Mediterranean
sea.</p>

<p>It did not exactly embarrass him to be introduced in this public
manner, but it did remind him of those European guides who brought
out every old relic and described it with a trite story and who if
interrupted were obliged to begain again at the beginning. After
the party learned the distinguishing characteristics of these
guides, they all determined to affect as much imbecility as
possible and they were equal to the task. The surgeon of the ship
was capable of asking the stupidest questions without moving a
muscle. One guide showed the handwriting of Columbus. The Dr.
inquired who he was, if he was dead, if his parents were dead, and
informed the dumbfounded guide that plenty of boys in America could
beat that, and if he had any good respectable penmanship, let him
bring it on. After conducting them through the Vatican without
eliciting any remarks of surprise, the poor guide showed a mummy,
one of the most remarkable and best preserved. The Dr, true to his
calling, inquired, "What did you remark that his name was? How calm
and placid! Is he dead?"</p>

<p>The true American vandal is not remarkably well versed in
sciences, arts and antiquities, but is sure to be perfectly at home
anywhere, and is bound to be surprised at everything and extract
wonders from the most trifling objects. He will half smoke himself
to death in trying to smoke a long-stemmed pipe <i>a la</i> Turk,
but will swear it good. He will go into ecstasies over the
insufferable horrors of a Turkish bath, though he is thinking the
while that he shall never live to come out. He will bandy words
with the cockney soldier about the impregnability of Gibraltar. He
will stand unabashed in the presence of one Pope, two or three
Kings and Grandees innumerable, and will stand unawed, unsubdued,
and pick his teeth before the venerable, time-honored, time-defying
placid face of the Sphinx.</p>

<p>Such an irrepressible vandal was that surgeon of the ship, who
pretended to be a doctor and perhaps he was, for he could handle
more unpronounceable Greek and Latin technical terms, than any
sensible man on earth. The surgeon was called upon by the captain's
son to prescribe for a horizontal parralax.</p>

<p>The true home of the vandal is Paris. He drinks champagne in
large quantities, attends all the plays, weeps when the crowd
weeps, and spats and stamps when other people do the same, though
he cannot tell the dialogue from the scenery. He learns to talk
French so well in six weeks that he is constantly abusing the
Parisians for not knowing their own language. He knew one, who, on
his return, failed to answer the salutations of his friends, he had
become so familiar with his adopted name that he found it difficult
to recognize his original one.</p>

<p>After doing Paris he generally goes to Genoa to see the
birth-place of Columbus and get a stone from the very house where
he was born. It has been estimated that all the stones taken from
that house, if collected, would build one 14,000 feet long and
16,000 feet high.</p>

<p>He generally takes mementoes from each place. One of the party
succeeded well till getting to the Crimea. Nothing could be found
but the hip bone of a horse. The traveler captured it and labelled
it "the jaw of a Russian General." Travelers' labels are not always
reliable. They found a work of art which represented a man being
skinned alive. It was wonderfully life like; it had such an
expression! A man skinned alive would be apt to give his attention
to that particular work -- unless his attention happened to be
called some other way. It wasn't pleasant to view works of that
nature; one is apt to dream about it afterwards. Still it reminded
him of a scene in early life. He was required to sleep in his
father's office, and one evening, as the moon was rising, he
thought he was almost sure there was something on the floor of the
room. He felt a little curious to know -- didn't feel anxious --
kept watching and discovered the white features of a dead man! He
had been brought there to have sentence passed upon him -- that is
an inquest -- and he was found guilty! He never felt so sick in all
his life, never felt so much like taking a walk. He didn't feel in
a hurry, not in the least agitated, but he went out of the window,
took the sash with him, not that he wanted anything of the sash,
but it seemed very convenient to take it along.</p>

<p>The vandal visits Venice that has existed as a republic for 1400
years, and laughs to scorn the armies and navies of the world. Here
is where Shylock used to loan money on human flesh -- and other
collaterals. Here he hears the song of the romantic gondolier. The
lecturer heard the song of the romantic gondolier; let him sing
about four minutes, and suppressed him and did a good job. His
private opinion is, though he hates to oppose Byron and such, but
his private opinion is, that the gondolier is a humbug -- as a
singer. But not too fast. It is grand to glide down street in a
gondola instead of a street car. Business men step out, put on
their gloves, and glide down to their counting rooms. The ladies
kiss good-bye, play all the secret deceptions of the sex in our own
land, but keep the gondolier waiting instead of the private
carriage. The go shopping just the same and compel the poor clerks
to lay down tons of silks, bombazines, corduroys and the like, and
then buy a paper of pins and have it sent home by the errand boy.
Ladies there, are the same angels as at home, have dresses cut
"bias," and have their back hair held up by a crupper just the same
way.</p>

<p>The old doctor wanted to see Scylla and Charybdis. He was up at
night with his everlasting spyglass. Some one asked what he wanted,
"Wanted," said he, "man you do not know me! I want to see all the
places mentioned in the Bible!" Explanation was made, and he
exclaimed, "There's another night's rest gone. I thought it was
Sodom and Gomorrah."</p>

<p>The vandal finally spreads himself abroad to Athens. He
approaches the grand old city in its silence, as it lies at his
feet as if seen from a balloon. Nowhere else in the world can
another such picture be seen. He would digress to tell an anecdote,
because he might forget it and because it had a moral. One of the
party on board the Quaker City had a chronic habit of
speech-making; it was natural, he could not help it. They sat in
their tent one evening in the holy land and our speech-maker called
the attention of a sailor to the mountains in the distance: "There,
Jack, is the Mountain of Moab. For ought we know you may now be
resting your eyes on the very spot of the mysterious grave of
Moses." "Moses who?" said Jack. "Why, you ignorant booby! Moses led
the children of Israel through the wilderness, 300 miles in forty
years." "In forty years!" said Jack;. "Why, Ben Holliday would have
put them through in forty-eight hours!"</p>

<p>It was a singular sight to stand before the Emperor of all the
Russias; a plain, common spoken man, dressed in no better clothes
than any of them; probably had no better. He might open his mouth,
and ships would depart on his errands, armies collect for his
service, a thousand trains fly at his bidding; yet his cordiality
was sincere and he stood the only European monarch who welcomed
them in their true capacity, as American sovereigns. He spoke of
this, because the Emperor is the only true friend we have among the
monarchs of the other side of the water. He felt on first-rate
terms with Alexander. Alexander gave him freedom to scatter himself
around at pleasure and leave just when he pleased. He showed that
he was possessed of a heart, rather an uncommon thing for monarchs
to have.</p>

<p>His passages descriptive of the Sphinx, a moonlight ride in
Venice, and the appearance of Athens from the surmounting eminence,
were really eloquent and finished. He is unmistakably a man of high
natural ability and considerable culture, and could not fail to
make his mark in other than his chosen themes. As a satirist and
humorist, he places no dependence upon uncouth spelling or local
vernacular. He has an easy, don't-carative manner and a little of
the swagger of the traditional Yankee joker without a single low or
ungrammatical phrase.</p>

<br>
<a href="vandschd.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="vandrev7">
<head>
<title>Toledo Blade Reviews the Vandal</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1869 Lecture Vandal Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center><img src="toldeo.jpg" alt="Toledo Blade, 21 January 1869">
</center>

<br>
<br>
<p><b>M<font size="-1">ARK</font> T<font size="-1">WAIN'S</font>
L<font size="-1">ECTURE.</font></b> -- White's Hall was filled from
cellar to garret, last night, by one of the best tickled audiences
that ever assembled there to hear a lecture or see the speaker.
Mark Twain tickled them. And he did it so easily and almost
consistently, that they didn't know what they were laughing at more
than half the time. Twain is witty, and his wit comes from his own
fertile brain. His style is original; and his manner of speaking is
not after the manner of men generally. His serious face and long
drawn words are, of themselves, sufficient to make one laugh, even
if there were not in every sentence expressed a sparkling gem of
humor, and original idea. His anecdotes, with which the lecture is
repleat, are rich, and, as he tells them, irresistibly funny. In
some of his descriptions of European places and characters the
lecturer delivers, at times, most eloquent passages, brilliant in
thought and word.</p>

<p>That M<font size="-1">ARK</font> T<font size="-1">WAIN</font> is
a success as a lecturer, as well as writer, we think no one who
heard "The American Vandal Abroad," last night, will dispute.</p>

<br>
<a href="vandschd.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="vandrev8">
<head>
<title>Iowa City Republican Reviews the Vandal</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1869 Lecture Vandal Midwestern Unfavorable </keyword> -->
<p><i>MT spoke in Iowa City on Friday, 15 January 1869. His visit
was not a success. In its weekly edition for January 13, the</i>
Iowa City Republican <i>advertised the lecture as a very promising
event:</i></p>

<p>T<font size="-1">HE</font> F<font size="-1">IRST</font> L<font
size="-1">ECTURE</font>. -- The first lecture of the Course will be
delivered on Friday evening of this week, at Metropolitan Hall, by
that celebrated humorist, Mark Twain. Subject: "The American Vandal
Abroad." We have never heard this lecturer, but judging from his
reputation we shall anticipate a rich and rare discourse. The
Association has selected him because he has succeeded in making
such a reputation, judging rightfully, that he could not have made
it without merit. We hope to see an old fashioned crowd in
attendance on Friday evening. The net proceeds of the lecture will
be devoted entirely to good works in our city. The time, the
occasion, the man, and the cause demand an overflowing house.</p>

<p><i>In its next edition, a week later, the paper panned MT's
performance both on and off stage.</i></p>

<center><img src="iowarep.jpg" alt=
"Iowa City Republican, 20 January 1869"></center>

<br>
<br>


<p>T<font size="-1">HE</font> V<font size="-1">ANDAL IN</font>
I<font size="-1">OWA</font> C<font size="-1">ITY</font>. -- A
splendid audience turned out to hear Mark Twain discourse about
"The Vandal Abroad," and we fear were generally disappointed. As a
lecture it was a humbug. As an occasion for laughter on very small
capital of wit or ideas it was a success. There were one or two
passages of some merit. His apostrophe to the Sphinx was decidedly
good, as was also his description of the ruins of the Parthenon,
and of Athens by moonlight. Some touches of Venice did very well,
but it was impossible to know when he was talking in earnest and
when in burlesque. It was amusing and interesting to see such a
crowd of people laughing together, even though we knew half of them
were ashamed that they were laughing at such very small witticisms.
We were very much disappointed that there was so little substance
to his lecture. We would not give two cents to hear him again.</p>

<p>But, lest he might not have succeeded with his "Vandal Abroad,"
he illustrated the character at the Clinton House, where he
stopped. The morning after the lecture nothing was seen of him up
to nine o'clock, and the landlord, in his kindness, went to his
room to see if he might not be in want of something, but received a
storm of curses and abuse for disturbing him. Of course the
landlord retreated and left him. After a while a terrible racket
was heard, and unearthly screams which frightened the women of the
house. The landlord rushed to the room and there found a splendid
specimen of the vandal and his works. There, before him, was the
veritable animal, with his skin on at least, but not much else, and
in a towering rage. He had kicked the fastenings from the door, not
deigning to open it in the usual way -- that would have been too
much like other folks. He poured upon the landlord another torrent
of curses, impudence and abuse. He demanded to know where the
bell-pull was. The landlord told him they were not up yet, and they
had not yet got the house fully completed. His kicking the door
open and his lung performance were his substitute for a bell. At
two o'clock P.M. he had not dressed, and whether he did before he
left on the five o'clock train we did not learn. The Y.M.C.A. were
wretchedly imposed upon by Mark Twain, and so of course were the
audience. He is the only one engaged for the course whose personal
character was unknown. In great contrast will he be followed by the
glorious Howard, the Christian Hero and Soldier, who gave his own
right arm to his country, and who was ever true to her cause and
the cause of his great Master above.</p>

<br>
<a href="vandschd.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="wrldtr1">
<head>
<title>World Tour Review, Minneapolis</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 Lecture World Midwestern Favorable</keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Minneapolis Tribune</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1895: July 24</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+2">SMILED WITH TWAIN</font></b><br>
<b><font size="+1">AMERICA'S GREATEST HUMORIST HEARD BY A PACKED
HOUSE</font></b><br>
<b>The Audience Asked to Follow the Speaker Through Various
Experiences -- Stories Told Reflecting the Humorous and the
Pathetic Phases of Numerous Instances -- Many Recognize Old Friends
as Huck Finn, Tom Sawyer, Runaway Jim Are Brought Before Them by
Matchless Mimicry -- Reception to Clemens at the Commercial Club
After the Lecture -- The Present Lecture Series Proving Very
Successful.</b><br>
<br>
 Mark Twain tried an experiment last night. His subject was one of
the most brilliant audiences that ever crowded into the
Metropolitan and sweltered in the heat of mid-summer. His
experiment was upon the arrangement of the stories for their
entertainment. The programs distributed were consequently entirely
misleading, but the story telling was up to par, and as most of the
audience had read Twain it made very little difference.

<p>He started off with that moral lecture on courage, in which he
makes the wise observation that every man's courage has a limit,
and then told how his limit was reached when he discovered a dead
man in his father's office at midnight, after one of his truancies.
The famous "Jumping Frog," that proved Twain a humorist and is
still regarded as one of his greatest stories, followed. The
rambling "Story of the Ram" was particularly humorous and brought
out more laughter than any other, but it was not more lifelike than
Tom Sawyer's conversation with Huckleberry Finn and himself on
starting a crusade. In this Mr. Twain seemed to point an innocent
idea at the socialistic idea of property which half-hidden,
half-revealed, formed the basis of his tale.</p>

<p>Then came the "First Theft" of the watermelon, but without doubt
the best story, and the one which the audience listened to with
hushed attention, was the pathetic struggle with his conscience
over his aiding to liberty runaway Darky Jim. Huck Finn and Jim on
the raft, both running away from harsh treatment, is one of the
prettiest pictures of anti[ante?]-emancipation life on the
Mississippi that has ever been penned. Mark hit the educated
conscience theory a pretty hard rap and then, just to show that he
could tell a story that was not located in the Mississippi valley
or in the far West, he gave the story of the christening. In this
Mr. Twain showed himself not only a story writer but a mimic. He
copied the Scotch-Irish preacher to perfection, and bowed the large
audience out well pleased to have seen and heard America's greatest
humorist.</p>

<p>After the lecture came the reception to Clemens at the
Commercial Club. It was fairly well attended, but no doubt hundreds
of people would have paid their respects to the veteran fun-maker
if it could have been known that no special invitation was
expected. Mr. Clemens was accompanied by Maj. and Mrs. Pond, but
Mrs. Clemens begged to be excused, as she was tired out with the
journey. The affair was simple and informal. Mayor and Mrs. Pratt,
President Calderwood, of the Commercial Club, and several other
gentlemen presented the callers to the guest of honor and he had
his hands full to chat with the many that crowded about to see the
humorist as a man.</p>

<p>Mr. Clemens had been in bed all day, and his lecture took nearly
all his conserved energy, but he chatted pleasantly and kept
everyone at ease with his droll observations. A light refreshment
followed the reception in the parlors, and about 11 o'clock Maj.
Pond and President Calderwood escorted Mark Twain to his hotel.</p>

<p>Among those at the reception were Mayor and Mrs. Robert Pratt,
C.H. Pryor and ladies, Mr. and Mrs. Charles P. Preston, Dr. and
Mrs. Charles M. Jordan, Mr. and Mrs. Adolph Edsten, Mr. and Mrs.
J.S. McLain, Mr. and Mrs. Walter Gregory, Mr. and Mrs. James Pye,
Dr. W.E. Leonard, C.R. Cameron, M.D. Shutter, E.W. Herrick, Rev.
and Mrs. Dr. Sneed, George Strong, F.V. Brown, W.M. Hopkins, A.B.
Choat, W.O. Stout, W.B. Stout, D. Willard, Harry Wheeler, W.C.
Corbett, W.H. Randall, Al. Warner and Frederick Clarke.</p>

<p>This is the fifth of the series of lectures to be given by Mr.
Clemens in a trip around the world. Maj. Pond says that it has been
successful far beyond his highest expectation. He claims to have
made money enough to take the party around the world and $1,000 to
spare up to this point. Twain will give his readings in St. Paul
this evening, thence go to Winnipeg and subsequently to Butte and
Helena, Mont.</p>

<p>A dinner is to be given to <a name="a">Mr. Clemens</a> and Maj.
Pond at the Minneapolis Club this noon.</p>

<hr width="25%">
<center>
<h1><i>Minneapolis Journal</i></h1>
</center>

<center>1895: July 24</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">Mark Twain's Lecture.</font></b><br>
<br>
 If there has ever been any question in the mind of Mark Twain as
to the regard in which by that portion of the reading public which
claims Minneapolis as its home, it must have been settled, and in a
most satisfactory manner, too, when he stepped upon the stage at
the Metropolitan last night, and confronted the sea of faces in the
big auditorium. With the possible exception of the night when Ysaye
made his appearance, the theater never has held a more brilliant
audience, and the warmth of welcome which greeted the distinguished
humorist was an index to the place he occupies in the affections of
those whom for the past three decades he has been endeavoring to
amuse. Time has dealt kindly with Mr. Clemens. There are signs of
age in the whitening hair, but there is the old-time twinkle in the
deep blue eyes, the same funny drawl about the speech, the
wonderful lighting up of the mobile, expressive face and the
inimitable charm to his story-telling that has made his efforts on
the rostrum so acceptable in the past.

<p>The program last night was not one calculated to bring out
boisterous merriment. The selections were permeated by a quiet
humor that made them entertaining, but in all of them was an
underlying vein of philosophy pointing to some moral -- a moral not
always strictly orthodox. Perhaps this was something of a
disappointment to many of those who attended, expecting to be
convulsed with laughter, but it was not for that reason less
enjoyable. As given, it was a judicious blending of the pathetic
and homely with those occasional scintillations of wit that flashed
like dew drops in the morning sun, and in obedience to the law of
contrasts each bringing out the other in stronger and more
pronounced relief. There is no gainsaying the fact that the big
audience was delightfully entertained during the short hour and a
half and that it quitted the theater reluctantly when the end of
the program was announced.</p>

<p>Including in the selections given last night were the famous
"Story of the Jumping Frog," "My First Theft" and the rambling
story of "Granther's Ram," a tale with a beginning that promised
well but which was never finished. The story of finding a corpse in
his father's office was a weird and uncanny bit of recital -- a
thing in which Mark Twain particularly excels. Possibly the best of
all was the story of Huck Finn helping the negro Jim to escape from
slavery. There was a humorously pathetic tone to the story of Huck
Finn's struggles with his conscience which would not let him rest
easy either when he was endeavoring to hide or betray the slave
whom he was aiding to escape to freedom. The one in which Tom
Sawyer proposes to Huck Finn and Jim that they organize a crusade
and rescue the "Holy Land" from the grasp of the infidels was a
delightful bit of boy nature and boyish aspiration, and was
thoroughly enjoyable. The program closed with a sketch of a
Scotch-Irish christening in which the pompous preacher was pictured
perfectly.</p>

<p>As Mr. Clemens turned to leave the stage, there was a storm of
applause and in obedience to the demand for another story, he gave
the "Whistling Story," which no one can tell so well as he. When he
had finished, he remained standing on the stage and bowed the large
audience out -- an audience that was well pleased to have met the
most genial humorist of the present age.</p>

<p>The reception given to the distinguished humorist at the
Commercial Club by the members of the club and the newspaper men of
the city was a most informal affair, but none the less pleasant on
that account. The gathering was not nearly so large as expected,
and for this Mr. Clemens was, no doubt, thankful, as he was not in
condition to enjoy a crush. Mayor and Mrs. Robert Pratt, Maj. and
Mrs. Pond, and President Calderwood attended to the introductions
and saw that all had an opportunity of a few moments' conversation
with the celebrated humorist, who is as affable off the stage as he
is enjoyable on it. Mrs. Clemens was indisposed and could not
attend.</p>

<p>A simple lunch was served about 11 o'clock, after which the
celebrated funmaker was escorted to his hotel by Mr.
Calderwood.</p>

<center><a href="wrldschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="wrldtr10">
<head>
<title>World Tour Review, Spokane</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 Lecture World Western Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Spokane Spokesman-Review</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1895: August 8</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">NINETY MINUTES WITH MARK TWAIN</font><br>
The Audience Thoroughly Enjoyed Their Evening With the
Humorist.</b><br>
<br>
 So many of the Spokane people are now camping out that the most
intelligent and highly appreciative audience which assembled to
hear Mark Twain last evening was not so large as it should have
been. All present thoroughly enjoyed their 90 minutes with the
greatest of American humorists, from their first smile at "a day
which was not good -- for school" to their nervous start at the
"ough" which ended the old negro's ghost story and the evening's
entertainment.

<p>Samuel L. Clemens, who for nearly a generation has been
considered the typical and most successful humorist of America, is
of medium height, sleight rather than portly, but his eagle face,
in its wavy mane of gray hair, is very striking. His slow drawl and
peculiarly dry manner are thoroughly natural to him, and were as
markedly his own when he lectured on the Sandwich Islands in the
60's.</p>

<p>He entertainment consists of the retelling of a number of the
most famous stories from his books, with a background of amusing
comment.</p>

<p>He told about his first fight; "The Jumping Frog," his first hit
in literature, the maundering ram story from "Roughing It," Huck
Finn's runaway trip, "An Early Transgression," in which he depicted
his juvenile remorse after stealing a green watermelon, the horrors
of the German language, and finally the ghost story of "The Golden
Arm."</p>

<p>Mark Twain's quaint and original humor delighted his hearers,
and the underlying stratum of pathos and serious thought, without
which humor becomes verbal horseplay, was as highly
appreciated.</p>

<center><a href="wrldschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="wrldtr11">
<head>
<title>World Tour Review, Cleveland</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 Lecture World Midwestern Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Cleveland Plain Dealer</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1895: July 16</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+2">MARK TWAIN.</font><br>
<font size="+1">His Scheme for the Regeneration of the Human
Race.</font><br>
He Makes a Startling Confession.<br>
<font size="-1">He Says That in His Plan of Regeneration He Has
Passed Through Two-Thirds of the Crimes of Which the Human Race is
Capable -- Preparing for a Tour Around the World.</font></b><br>
<br>
 Samuel M. Clemens, familiarly known as Mark Twain, arrived in
Cleveland yesterday afternoon on his lecture tour around the globe.
He was accompanied by Mrs. Clemens and their daughter, and by his
manager, Major J.B. Pond and wife. Mr. Clemens and his party took
rooms at The Stillman, and as Mr. Clemens is suffering from a very
painful carbuncle on his leg he spent much of his time in bed. He
bore his affliction with surprising heroism, however, and even
consented to half a score of interviews in addition, without so
much as complaining.

<p>"So far as Joan of Arc is concerned," he said, when asked about
the authorship of the memoirs now being published in Harper's
Magazine, "I have been asked that question several times. I have
always considered it wise, however, to leave an unclaimed piece of
literary property alone until time has shown that no one is going
to claim it. Then it is safe to acknowledge you wrote that, whether
you did or not. It is in this way that I have become recognized and
respected as the author of 'Beautiful Snow,' 'Rocked in the Cradle
of the Deep' and other literary gems."</p>

<p>When asked how he came to take the nom de plume of Mark Twain he
said that that well known equivalent for "two fathoms" on the
sounding line had been used as a nom de plume for a few marine
notes furnished a New Orleans paper by the oldest captain on the
river -- Isaiah Sellers. "When the word came out to Virginia City
that Sellers was dead," said he, "I did not think it would be much
of a crime to rob that corpse of that nom de plume, and I did
so."</p>

<p>Mark Twain, the American humorist, stood before an immense
audience in Music hall last evening and demonstrated his latest
scheme for the moral regeneration of the human race. The speaker
appeared in this city over ten years ago and the decade has wrought
great changes in his appearance. His immense shock of hair has
turned nearly white, but his humor is just as vigorous and his
style as entertaining as ever. Mr. Clemens has been ill for several
weeks and his appearance last evening was almost on the eve of his
long contemplated tour around the world by way of Australia. His
lecture was given for the benefit of the News-boys' home.</p>

<p>Mark Twain's theory for the moral regeneration of the race is
sensationally unique. He proposes that man shall be guilty of the
entire category of crimes and misdemeanors, thereby gaining
impressions of wickedness which he will never forget, and by the
experience thus gained he will shun wickedness. The audience became
convulsed when the speaker deliberately assured them that he had
passed through two-thirds of the crimes of which the human race is
capable and that he hoped in a few more years to complete the list
and reach the stage of perfect moral manhood. His matter of fact
manner in reaching startling conclusions is one of the chief powers
of the great humorist.</p>

<p>The effort of Mr. Clemens was preluded by two very pleasing
violin solos by Fiora Drescher of New York and a couple of flute
solos by Mr. Dewey Haywood of Chicago.</p>

<p>Miss Drescher is a very beautiful woman, with large, dark eyes
and dark hair. She plays with a great deal of expression and
feeling. Her violin is over a hundred years old and has been owned
by Remenyi, Ole Bull and Camilla Urso. Mr. Haywood is the husband
of Miss Drescher. They were married three weeks ago today in
Chicago. Mr. H.J. Kroessen of this city was accompanist.</p>

<center><a href="wrldschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="wrldtr12">
<head>
<title>World Tour Review, Olympia</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 Lecture World Western Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>Daily (Olympia) Olympian</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1895: August 12</center>

<br>
 Mark Twain entertained a fair sized audience at the theater
Saturday night. His recitations and stories were greatly enjoyed
and applauded. He left for Tacoma yesterday, via the Olympia &amp;
Tumwater, Port Townsend Southern and Northern Pacific.

<center><a href="wrldschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="wrldtr13">
<head>
<title>World Tour Review, Anaconda</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 Lecture World Western Favorable</keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Anaconda Standard</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1895: August 3</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">FUNNY MARK.</font><br>
He Pleases a Large Audience in Evans' Opera House.</b><br>
<br>
 Samuel L. Clemens, known to the world as Mark Twain, stood before
an audience composed of some of the best people of Anaconda, in
Evans' opera house last evening. The entertainment was
characteristic, it was as original in style as are the writings of
the man. It was not a lecture, not exactly readings, the author
simply ascended the platform and began to talk as though he were in
a parlor, and in the course of a one-sided conversation he told six
or seven stories, one after the other, until an hour and a half
went by and no one had noticed the time in its flight.

<p>Mark Twain in a dress suit and an immaculate expanse of white
shirt front has none of the slouchy appearance that his latest
pictures give to him, on the contrary, he is spruce and trim. He
has a shaggy bunch of iron-gray hair about his head, and his eyes
are set deep under a broad forehead. He speaks with a twang and a
drawl that is in keeping with his humor and would be amusing if he
were speaking solemnly, but when it is used in telling funny
stories it is more than amusing, it produces spontaneous laughter
in every audience he has ever tried it on. Acaconda people were no
exception, they are enjoyed the programme and will long remember
the night they saw and heard Mark Twain.</p>

<center><a href="wrldschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="wrldtr14">
<head>
<title>World Tour Review, Butte</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 Lecture World Western Favorable </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The Anaconda Standard</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1895: August 2</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">MARK'S ALL RIGHT.</font><br>
He Can Keep an Audience in an Uproar Without an Effort.</b><br>
<br>
 Butte, Aug. 1. -- It is doubtful if Maguire's opera house ever
contained a more delighted audience than the one that filled it
to-night to listen to Mark Twain. From his first story of the night
he spent with a coroner's subject until he startled the audience
out of their seats by the sudden ending of his ghost story, the
people laughed until laughing became painful. He spoke for an hour
and a half and told the ludicrous story of the jumping frog, the
story about Huckleberry Finn when his feeling got the best of his
"consciences" while aiding "Jim," the slave, to escape. Greater was
the man who started to tell about an experience his grandfather had
with a ram, but just before reaching the thrilling part of his
narrative wandered from his subject and never got back to it. The
story reminded many people in the audience of a well-known citizen
of Butte.

<p>Then came the story about Mr. Twain's first theft, when he stole
a watermelon from a peddler's wagon, and finding that it was green,
how his conscience troubled him, until he returned it to the
peddler and made him give him a ripe one in exchange for it. The
next narrative was about Tom Sawyer's crusade, and that was
followed with the final number of the programme, the ghost story
about the golden arm.</p>

<p>After the lecture many were honored with an introduction to the
noted humorist and called on him at the Butte where Mr. Clemens,
wife and daughter and Major J. B. Pond and wife are stopping.</p>

<center><a href="wrldschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="wrldtr2">
<head>
<title>World Tour Review, Great Falls</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 Lecture World Western Favorable</keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>Great Falls (Montana) Daily Tribune</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1895: August 1</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">MARK TWAIN<br>
Delighted a Large Audience Last Night at the Opera
House.</font></b><br>
<br>
 The inimitable Mark Twain, who has chased away somber thoughts and
straightened out the creases in millions of brows by his quaint
humor, visited Great Falls for the first time yesterday. He was
accompanied by his wife and daughter and Maj. Pond, who is so well
known as the veteran lecture bureau man. Mrs. Pond also accompanies
the party, who are bent on making a trip around the world.

<p>The lecture last night was attended by the best people in the
city and thoroughly enjoyed by them. It was largely made up from
selections from his works. The quaintness and originality of the
man and his manner gave an added charm to the stories. The finale
of the lecture was a ghost story, which ended with a surprise to
the audience, and illustrated as well perhaps as anything the
peculiar humor of the man.</p>

<p>After the lecture Mr. Clemens (Mark Twain) and Maj. Pond were
the guests of the Electric club, and it is unnecessary to say that
they had a jolly good time.</p>

<center><a href="wrldschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="wrldtr3">
<head>
<title>World Tour Review, Tacoma</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 Lecture World Western Mixed </keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>Tacoma Daily News</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1895: August 13</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">Mark Twain at the Tacoma
Theatre.</font></b><br>
<br>
 Mark had a crowded house last night. Tacoma's very best people
were out in force to listen to him, and they were ready to laugh
upon the slightest provocation. That is, the most of them were.
There were some very intelligent people in the audience who were
unable to swing into line with Mark's peculiar kind of humor and
they looked tired, too tired even to smile. But he tickled the
risibilities of all the rest, and they enjoyed themselves
thoroughly and paid no attention to the folks who were too opaque
to appreciate the fun. His evening in Tacoma was a big success.

<center><a href="wrldschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="wrldtr4">
<head>
<title>World Tour Review, Portland</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 Lecture World Western Favorable</keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The (Portland) Oregonian</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1895: August 10</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">Mark Twain at the Marquam.</font></b><br>
<br>
Last night a brilliant audience was assembled at the Marquam Grand
to hear Samuel L. Clemens, otherwise known as Mark Twain, one of
the most noted humorists of the day. Those who had been anxiously
awaiting this event were in no way disappointed. In addition to the
keen, subtle wit which permeates his writings, his delivery is a
most fitting accompaniment. His droll, quiet manner, his peculiar
pronunciation, his inimitable drawl, all tend to give the audience
the time to see the point which everything he says unquestionably
has. His personal appearance, as also his facial expression are of
material value to him, and taken altogether, he carried the house
by storm, to judge from the applause which greeted every sally.

<p>With more solidity and depth than most of that class of writers,
Mark Twain keeps coming to the front instead of sinking into
oblivion, and the name is as familiar to the rising generation as
it was when he first made his appearance in the literary world. To
have accomplished this, there must have been more to his work than
simply humor. This humor must have been true to life rather than an
exaggeration to provoke mirth. In many cases, it is a question
whether his mirth is not rather pathos, and the two are so
delightfully blended that it is not hard to conceive why Mark Twain
stands where he does today.</p>

<p>The house was one ripple of laughter from the beginning to the
end, the only regrettable feature being that Portland only has this
one opportunity to hear him. After the fall of the curtain and the
house was thinning out, the applause was sufficient to call him
before the curtain, and a request was called out from the audience
to give the "Stammerer's Tale," which he did most graciously.</p>

<p>The audience last night was very fashionable, as well as
extremely large. Every seat in both the dress circle and balcony
was occupied, with numbers standing, and the gallery was well
filled. The lecture consisted of the following original selections
from Twain's writings: "My First Theft," "The Jumping Frog,"
"Character of the Blue Jay," "A Fancy Dress Incident," "Bit Off
More Than He Could Chew," "Tom Sawyer's Crusade," "Fighting a Duel
in Nevada," and "A Ghost Story." The entertainment consumed an hour
and a half, and at its close the lecturer took occasion to thank
his hearers for such a cordial reception on a summer evening, and
expressed his sincere gratification that hhis meeting with the
public of Portland was of such a substantial and pleasing
character.</p>

<center><a href="wrldschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="wrldtr5">
<head>
<title>World Tour Review, Crookston</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 Lecture World Midwestern Mixed</keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>Crookston (Minnesota) Daily Times</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1895: July 30</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+2">A CROWD</font><br>
<font size="+1">Heard America's Prince of Humorists and Entertains
Last Night.</font></b><br>
<br>
The opera house, last night, held one of the larget and most
appreciative audiences in its history, the occasion being the
appearance of the greatest of American humorists, Mark Twain. Mr.
Clemens spoke for fully an hour and a half, and the close attention
he received must have been very gratifying. Of course there were a
few who had gone with the idea of hearing something on the negro
minstrel order and these were disappointed. Mr. Clemens' selections
were all taken from his books and while humorous, each contained
some deep thoughts, which hidden perhaps at first reveal themselves
in later examination, and furnished food for thought.

<p>The sketches from Adam's Diary, which Mr. Clemens presented for
the first time last evening, showed probably more originality than
any of the other selections, while his "Watermelon" story was
probably the most humorous, and the "Ghost Story" brought out his
wonderful ability as a story teller, to the best advantage.</p>

<p>On the whole the entertainment was very enjoyable, and no one
who is at all acquainted with Mr. Clemens' works will regret having
heard him.</p>

<center><a href="wrldschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="wrldtr6">
<head>
<title>World Tour Review, Petoskey</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 Lecture World Midwestern Favorable</keyword> -->
<center>
<h2><i>The (Petoskey) Daily Resorter</i></h2>
</center>

<center>1895: July 21</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+1">A PACKED HOUSE. AND MANY TURNED
AWAY.</font><br>
Mark Twain's Entertainment at the Grand Opera House Last
Night.</b><br>
<br>
 An audience which packed the Grand opera house from the orchestra
railing to the top row of the rear gallery greeted Mark Twain when
the curtain rose last night. Every seat was sold and over a hundred
chairs were brought in to try to accommodate those who wished to
see America's great humorist, and even then many were turned away.
It was the largest, the most cultured, and the best audience ever
seen in Petoskey, the receipts being $524.

<p>The lecturer was not at his best last night, having but recently
left the bed to which he was confined for weeks with a carbuncle
that at one time threatened his life. Indeed he was obliged to go
to bed immediately upon his arrival in the afternoon. But
notwithstanding his condition he kept the vast audience in a
constant ripple of laughter from first to last, and when he
suggested stopping he was greeted by cries of "go on, go on,"
accompanied by enthusiastic applause. He was however compelled to
cut his time somewhat, only speaking about an hour and twenty
minutes.</p>

<p>Mr. Clemens is a small, slight man, with spare face, a little
the worse for wear, with shaggy eyebrows about his twinkling eyes
and a drooping mustache falling over his mouth. But the
distinguishing mark of the man -- a unconscious pun -- is the mass
of bushy iron gray hair which encircles his head like a halo to
speak poetically, or like the Wild Man of Borneo to be literal. He
speaks with a peculiar drawl, and in a sort of confidentially
conversational manner which makes everything wonderfully effective.
If what he said were printed word for word it would not seem
particularly humorous, but told in his inimitable style it is
irresistably funny.</p>

<p>The program last night began with an account of the lecturer's
first theft. He thought it was the first watermelon he ever stole,
but was not entirely clear on that point. By what he is still
compelled to consider an inexcusable mistake he took a green melon
from the wagon of a farmer who was peddling them out. When he
realized the true character of his act he immediately repented. He
felt a moral uplifting which compelled him to restore the melon to
the farmer. He delivered it, accompanied by a lecture on the sin of
selling green melons which led the farmer to reform, so that Mark
was rewarded by the consciousness of leading a fellow creature into
the paths of rectitude, besides getting a ripe melon for the green
one which the farmer supposed he had sold.</p>

<p>One of his most graphic descriptions was an account of a
boyhood's experience, sneaking into his father's office at midnight
to sleep on the couch, where unknown to him a murdered man had been
stretched out awaiting an inquest. The people held their breath as
a told how his hair rose when he discovered a nameless something on
the floor, but the gruesome feeling changed to uproarious hilarity
when he told how, when the moonlight finally gleamed upon the
corpse, he "went away," taking the window sash with him, "not that
I needed the sash, but it was more convenient to take it."</p>

<p>The crowd was also immensely "tickled" over the story of the
jumping frog. An extract from Tom Sawyer, the plan for the crusade,
afforded an excellent opportunity for the dialect work of which
Twain is a master.</p>

<p>The Arlington orchestra furnished several choice selections
while the audience was gathering, and at the close of the
entertainment.</p>

<center><a href="wrldschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="wrldtr7">
<head>
<title>World Tour Review, Seattle</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!-- <keyword>1895 Lecture World Western Mixed </keyword> -->

<center>
<h1><i>Seattle Times</i></h1>
</center>

<center>1895: August 14</center>

<br>
 If Mark Twain is the representative American humorist American
humor is rather a sorry product. That he is funny no one can deny;
that his exaggerations are grotesque is also true; but that his wit
is brilliant or his humor suggestive cannot be truly claimed. His
fun leaves absolutely nothing to the imagination. It is like
machine work. Take his story of the theft of the watermelon. There
is hardly an incident in every day life that could not be made
amusing if told as he told that story. The fun of that story
consisted in the way it was told, not in the story itself. That is,
it depended upon the tricks of the comedian, not upon the wit or
humor underlying the thought. His sketch of Huck Finn and Nigger
Jim was very different. Here the basal idea was the struggle
between "a good heart and a half-educated conscience," and it was
admirably brought out. The sketch of the night spent in his
father's office with the corpse was neither funny nor gruesome. It
would have been intolerable if it were not for a few cute
expressions, such as: "I took the sash out of the window with me. I
did not really want the sash," and so on. Deprived of these it was
simply a good story, badly told. Mr. Clement's [sic] studied
awkwardness of manner helps what he says wonderfully, and his
peculiar tone of voice is a potent adjunct to his fun. The audience
was greatly amused, but it is also true that they were somewhat
disappointed. Mark Twain can tell a story very much better than
most men; he can see the droll aspect of things as few others can;
but he has little creative genius. His <a name="a">published
works</a> show that.

<hr width="20%">
<center>
<h1><i>The Seattle Post-Intelligencer</i></h1>
</center>

<center>1895: August 14</center>

<br>
 <b><font size="+2">A CONTINUOUS LAUGH</font><br>
<font size="+1">Mark Twain Again Proves His Greatness as a
Humorist.</font><br>
FLOWING STREAM OF DROLLERY</b><br>
<br>
 There is but one Mark Twain. He is not classic, and he is just as
far from being conventional; but people like him and listen to him
all the more because he is himself. Last night at the Seattle
theater a crowded audience heard him for an hour and a half with
unwearying enjoyment as he gave one of those strange medleys of
humor and philosophy which have so much the sound of a great
literary improvisation. To tell the story of such a lecture is like
trying to narrate a laugh. Those who heard it enjoyed it, and those
who did not cannot conceive of it.

<p>The string on which the great humorist strung the many anecdotes
and jests that made up the body of the evening's entertainment was
a pretended moral lecture, which he said he had in mind to work out
at his leisure. Thus he would tell some droll story and draw
therefrom some far-fetched moral, which found its chief pith and
merit in being far-fetched. The following will serve as a poor
sample of a dozen of its kind:</p>

<p><img src="wrldpic4.GIF" align="left"> "When I was a boy my
father lived in a little Missouri village on the banks of the
Mississippi river. The place was so small that it was necessary for
one man to hold several such offices as coroner, mayor, postmaster,
in order to maintain the dignity of each. My father was the
incumbent. He had a small office built wherein his numerous
functions were discharged. It was not often that he got to act as
coroner, but now and then the community furnished a corpse. In the
office was a sofa, which was to me a very useful article of
furniture. We boys were told not to go fishing. For that reason we
went. On returning from one of these excursions, I did not care to
go at once into the home circle. I preferred letting the home
atmosphere cool down till next morning. Accordingly I would creep
into that office and use that sofa as a bed.</p>

<p>"One day there had been a fight in the village while I was out
fishing. One man had killed another with a bowie knife. The corpse
had been stripped to the waist and laid out on the floor of the
little office ready for the inquest next morning. Late at night I
came in, ignorant of what had occurred. I crept to the sofa was
just sinking into the deep, sweet sleep which is the reward of
honest toil when a strange feeling came over me as I thought I saw
some uncanny object on the floor. I first resolve to feel it, but
concluded I would wait. Just beyond it were some squares of
moonlight on the floor and I decided to wait till the moonlight
crept along to where the thing lay. Only those who have waited for
the moon at midnight know how slow it is. At last there lay a
pallid human hand in the ghostly light. I tried to turn over and
count a thousand till the moon should reveal what I knew now was
there, but I got no further than seventy-five. After what seemed an
interminable time, the white, muscular arm, then the rigid, set
face, then the body with the knife wound on the left side came into
view. I went away from there. I do not mean to imply that I left
hurriedly. I simply went. I went through the window. I took the
sash along with me. I did not have any special use for the sash,
but under the circumstances it was easier to take it than it was to
leave it.</p>

<p>"Now, in planning my great lecture on morals, I mean to
introduce this story to illustrate the principle that early in life
a young man should certainly gauge his limitations. He should know
just exactly how brave he is, how far he can rely on his own
courage before he is compelled to begin to use his discretion."</p>

<p>In similar vein the lecturer gave the story of the bucking horse
from his "Roughing It," which he said he proposed to use in his
great lecture "to show that we should be careful how we make the
acquaintance of strangers." Then he shot off at a merry tangent to
say that Mount Ranier had been pursuing this policy toward him
during his first visit. To illustrate the moral that conclusions
must not be drawn hastily, the gave the story of the preacher's
long baptismal harangue over what he supposed to be a boy baby,
till the name of Mary Ann was announced. In much the same tone
followed the story of the grandfather and the ram, and of Jim and
Huckleberry Finn when these two worthies were running away, and of
"My first theft."</p>

<p>Leaving this hypothetical lecture on morals, Mr. Clemens was
proceeding to give the substance of his famous essay on the German
language, when a rough voice from the gallery cried out: "Haf you
been to Heidelberg?" "Yes," retorted the lecturer, with ready wit;
"I studied German there and I learned many other things there also,
among them how to drink beer." The questioner subsided.</p>

<p>As a conclusion, Mr. Clemens gave his famous ghost story. It was
the strongest piece given by him, or rather, he gave it most
strongly, and when the unexpected denouement was reached there was
many a sudden jump among those who had been betrayed into
breathless expectancy through the weird magic of the well-told
dialect story.</p>

<p>As a mark of honor Mr. Clemens was called before the curtain,
and in response he gave "The Stammerer" in mirth-provoking
style.</p>

<p>Among those who occupied boxes were the members of the Torbert
Concert company, who appear at the Seattle theater on Saturday
night. Major Pond speaks in the highest terms of this company, Miss
Torbert being, in fact, a protoge of his, his first appearance with
her dating from her membership in Beecher's church.</p>

<center><a href="wrldschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html id="wrldtr8">
<head>
<title>World Tour Review, Duluth</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">

<!-- <keyword>1895 Lecture World Midwestern Mixed </keyword> -->

<center><h1><i>The Duluth Evening Herald</i></h1></center>

<center>1895: July 23</center>

<br>

<b><font size="+1">MARK TWAIN.</font></b>
<br>
<br>
Mark Twain came in on the North West last evening and consequently
was about an hour late in arriving at the First Methodist church. A
hack was waiting at the dock and drove him as quickly as possible
to the church. He walked on the platform at about 9:10 o'clock and
calmly announced that it looked for a time as though he was to be
late but fortunately it was not so.

<p>Twain is a man of medium height and size with a rather calm and
serene looking countenance. He wears an iron grey moustache and a
bushy head of decidedly grey hair that makes one believe Twain is
trying to rival Paderewski. His style is rather original. He speaks
slowly with a peculiar drawl and gives one the idea that nothing on
earth could make him talk any faster.</p>

<p>As for the entertainment, however, it must be admitted that it
was disappointing. Perhaps expectations were raised too high. The
people started in to laugh at once as though they were there for
that purpose and thought they ought to. After he had narrated a
couple of his yarns, however, they subsided somewhat, and only
occasionally broke out again. Twain did not seem to be able to get
the audience under his control although he had the opportunity to
do it very easily at the beginning.</p>

<p>His entertainment is rather informal in style. He slides easily
from one story into another without much warning and introduces
anecdotes as they come to his mind. Some of them impress one as
being very funny, although all of them are of rather a <a name="a">
dry sort</a> of humor, but some others fall somewhat flat.</p>

<hr width="25%">
<center>
<h1><i>The Duluth News Tribune</i></h1>
</center>

<center>1895: July 23</center>

<br>
<b><font size="+2">MARK AN HOUR LATE</font><br>
<font size="+1">The Humorist Disembarks From the Steamer in a Dress
Suit</font><br>
HURRIED INVERVIEW ON DOCK<br>
At the Church a Big Audience Patiently Awaited His Arrival.</b><br>
<br>
 While the large audience waited for the coming of Mark Twain at
the First Methodist church, Deacon R.R. Briggs waited on the
Northern steamship dock, peering out seaward for a glimpse of the
big white ship and the delinquent lecturer.

<p>"There she comes! There she comes!" ejaculated Mr. Briggs, as he
hopped around on the dock, with smiling face.</p>

<p>"There's Maj. Pond," exclaimed the deacon, as the big vessel
neared the dock. Maj. Pond stood on the edge of the gangway,
peering onto the dock, and by his side, all dressed for the
platform, stood Mark Twain. Behind him stood Mrs. Clemens and Miss
Clemens.</p>

<p>"Here we are, Major!" shouted Deacon Briggs.</p>

<p>The boat's officers blew their whistles, shouted commands, and
in a moment the big vessel stood close to the dock. The gang plank
was run aboard. Purser Pierce stepped aside and off came big Maj.
Pond, chin whiskers, white straw hat, good natured countenance and
all. He was closely followed by Mark Twain and his family.</p>

<p>"Is there a carriage here?" queried the humorist.</p>

<p>"Right this way," replied Mr. Briggs, as he started across the
dock for a hack that stood in waiting at the corner.</p>

<p>Twain bustled along at the heels of the quick stepping deacon,
and his wife and daughter came along with Maj. Pond.</p>

<p>"Drive to the First Methodist church faster than you ever drove
before," ordered Mr. Briggs as he climbed nimbly onto the box with
the driver.</p>

<p>"I'll run 'em all the way," replied the Jehu.</p>

<p>The whip cracked, the horses sprang forward and the carriage
went whirling away at a furious pace.</p>

<p><br>
<b><font size="+1">MR. CLEMENS' LECTURE</font><br>
It Was Mostly Made Up of Readings and Very Funny Stories</b><br>
<br>
It was about 9 o'clock when the audience that filled the First
Methodist church heard the cry outside, "Here he comes," and
hundreds of expectant eyes turned toward the door through which the
famous humorist entered escorted by Rev. Dr. Thoburn. "It looked
for a time," said Mr. Clemens by way of introduction, "as if I
would be a few minutes late." Then he recited the story of the frog
jumping match, so familiar to all readers of his stories; told of
going to his father's doctor office one night after having played
truant and finding the body of a man who had been killed. Mark told
a story of Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn, followed by the ghost story,
which was related so artistically that the final "Wough!" brought
every one to his feet. There was also a story of a new clergyman at
a christening. The clergyman dilated at length on an excuse for the
small size of the little one whom he understood to be a boy. Ending
an eloquent peroration to the effect that the infant might prove a
modern Caeser or Hannibal, he asked abruptly, "But what is his
name?" "Name is it?" replied one of the company, "Why his name it
is Mary Ann."</p>

<p>Mr. Clemens and his party left last night for St. Paul, where he
lectures tonight.</p>

<center><a href="wrldschd.html">Back to Tour Schedule</a></center>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>Christian Secretary Reviews Tom</title>
</head>
<body background="../bkgrnd2.gif">
<!--<keyword>1877 American Eastern Mixed </keyword>-->
<h2>Hartford <i>Christian Secretary</i> [unsigned]<br>
1877: May 17</h2>

<p>Our city of Hartford can boast the greatest humorist in current
literature. Mr. Clemens owes nothing to erratic spelling like
"Artemas Ward," or to exciting political themes like some other
witty writers. He is altogether original and unique. "The Innocents
Abroad," is an exhaustless feast vastly entertaining and full of
information as a book of travels. The same charm of genius in an
unusual direction fills the fascinating pages of "Tom Sawyer." The
boy hero and the other children are so lifelike that the reader
hardly needs the author's assurance that real boys and genuine
parts are in the book. One gets very fond of Tom notwithstanding
his grave faults, some of which you almost wish had been omitted.
But he is a brave, manly boy after all, and the finest scene in the
whole story to one reader at least, is where he receives a whipping
to shield a little, terrified girl. The childish attachment between
these two and the manly protection Tom accords to little Becky both
at school and amid the horrors of being lost in the cave, are very
finely described. To one who had only seen the other side of Tom's
character these noble traits would have seemed impossible. The
"pain-killer" adventure is funny beyond expression as is much of
Tom's career. The last few chapters are extremely sensational and
strike one as too remarkable to be natural adventures for little
boys. One cannot help regretting that so fine a fellow as Tom lies
and smokes, but the intention was not to describe a model boy. Yet
these traits solely detract from the hero. Those who regard Mark
Twain as only "a funny man," greatly underestimate his power. Wit
is the spice of his books not the substance. In this story are some
most exquisitely beautiful descriptions. That of early morning in
one place particularly, is delicious in its perfect picture of
nature and its beautiful poetry.</p>

<a href="hompgrev.html"><img src="../barrel.jpg" align="left"></a>
<a href="hompgrev.html"><img src="raft.gif" align="right"></a>
<!-- Matomo --> <script> var _paq = window._paq = window._paq || []; /* tracker methods like "setCustomDimension" should be called before "trackPageView" */ _paq.push(['trackPageView']); _paq.push(['enableLinkTracking']); (function() { var u="https://analytics.lib.virginia.edu/"; _paq.push(['setTrackerUrl', u+'matomo.php']); _paq.push(['setSiteId', '46']); var d=document, g=d.createElement('script'), s=d.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; g.async=true; g.src=u+'matomo.js'; s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s); })(); </script> <!-- End Matomo Code -->
</body>
</html>
